
[Cover Image]
PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.
THE author of this humble work begs leave to accompany it with a few brief remarks to those of his brethren who may think proper to use it.
1. It is believed that a Catechism for the mass of colored people, whether children or adults, had better be confined to the rudiments of Christian knowledge, simply, than diffused through a wide range of Scripture topics, doctrinal, historical, biographical, &c.; our object being not barely to communicate knowledge, but such as tends most to the glory of God—the knowledge of salvation.
2. The present little work has been composed under a persuasion that the persons to be instructed can more easily conceive the truth than comprehend the terms in which it is apt to be expressed. We have therefore discarded all hard words, and aimed to present truth in a guise so simple as to suit their capacities. This, however, is very difficult; we can only say, we have done what we could.
3. It is not pretended that this Catechism contains all that ought to be taught; and yet, we fear, it will be found too full for many learners. It is designed as a help to the missionary in his truly Christian work of directing the untutored mind to the knowledge of God. The questions and answers may sometimes need explanation, and will often serve as a text for further instructions and exhortations. Other questions also will suggest themselves in the course of instruction.
4. For children, it may be well to follow the order of the chapters as they have been arranged, except the tenth chapter, which may be brought in at any place. If, however, in some cases, there appears no likelihood of children's getting through with the whole Catechism, the missionary will select particular questions, and arrange them into lessons, at his discretion.
For adults, particularly on the plantations, it is recommended to begin with those questions which are marked with an asterisk, (*,) and, perhaps, in the order in which they are numbered.
W. C.
CATECHISM
CHAPTER I. OF GOD.
Who made you?
God.
What did he make you for?
For his glory.
Who is God?
The Almighty, maker of heaven and earth.
What do you know of him?
God is holy, just and true.
What else do you know of him?
God is merciful, good and gracious.
How old is he?
God does not grow old; he always was, and always will be.
What is he able to do?
God can do all things.
What does he know?
God knows all things.
Where is he?
God is in heaven, and everywhere.
Does he always see us, and take notice of us?
Yes; nothing can hide us from God.
Does he care for us?
O yes; God is our Father in heaven.
CHAPTER II. THE CREATION OF MAN.
What did God make man out of?
The dust of the ground.
What does this teach you?
To be humble.
What else does it teach you?
To remember I must die, and my body turn to dust again.
But did God make man's soul out of the dust of the ground?
No; only man's body belongs to the dust.
How did God make man's soul?
With his own breath.
Will your soul turn to dust with your body when you die?
No: my soul cannot turn to dust.
When God first made man, was he good or bad?
God made man good, like himself.
Where did God put the first man and woman?
In the garden of paradise.
And was that a good place?
Yes; everything God made was good.
Was man happy in paradise?
Yes; everything was there to make man happy.
CHAPTER III. THE FALL OF MAN.
What made man fall from paradise?
Sin.
What is sin?
Doing what God says we must not do.
What did God say the man and woman must not do in paradise?
He said they must not eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
And did they eat of it?
Yes; they did eat of it.
How did they come to eat of it?
The devil tempted the woman; and she did eat, and gave to her husband, and he did eat.
What happened to them then?
They were good no more, and God was angry with them.
And what did God do to them?
He turned them out of paradise.
What more did he do to them?
He sentenced them to labor and sorrow, pain and death.
Did they have any children before they sinned and lost that good nature that God made them in?
No; they sinned first, and their children were born in sin.
And are all men born sinners still?
None are born good; no, not one.
CHAPTER IV. THE PROMISE OF A SAVIOUR—CHRIST'S INCARNATION—THE CHILD JESUS.
Who is the Saviour of mankind?
Our Lord Jesus Christ.
What has he done to save mankind?
He came down out of heaven, and suffered and died on the cross.
Did he come, and steer, and die for men, as soon as the first man sinned?
No: but he promised he would come, and he did come.
Who is our Lord Jesus Christ?
The Son of God.
Is he God, then?
Yes; he is very God.
But could the Son of God suffer and die?
He came to be man to suffer and die for us.
When he came down from heaven was he born a little child, and did he grow up to be a man, like all little children grow up?
Yes; he did.
Who was his mother?
A virgin, named Mary.
Where was he born?
In Bethlehem, a town among the Jews.
What sort of a place was he born in?
A manger, in a stable.
How did people know that he was born to be the Saviour?
The angels did tell it from heaven.
What does the Scripture say about him when he was a child?
He was subject to his parents.
CHAPTER V. THE MINISTRY OF CHRIST.
What happened when Jesus was baptized?
Heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost came down like a dove, and lighted on him.
What else happened?
A voice came from heaven, and said, This is my beloved Son.
What did our Lord Jesus say about himself?
He said he came down from heaven.
What more did he say?
He said he was one with the Father.
What did he do to show the people that he was God as well as man, and was come to save them?
He did great wonders.
Tell me some of them.
He healed the sick, raised the dead, and cast out devils.
Did the people believe in him?
Some did; but many more did not.
Why did not all believe in him?
Because they loved sin more than God.
What did our Lord Jesus Christ do for them that believed in him?
He pardoned their sins, and made them true Christians.
What did he say about them that would not believe in him?
He said they must die in their sins.
What did he say about little children?
He said they belonged to him.
What did he do to them?
He took them up in his arms and blessed them.
What did he preach to the people?
That they must repent and believe the gospel.
CHAPTER VI. THE DEATH AND RESURRECTION OF CHRIST.
How did our Lord Jesus die?
Wicked men rose up and crucified him.
But why did he not save himself from them?
Because he came into the world to die for sinners.
Did he do nothing to those wicked men?
He prayed for them.
What happened when our Lord was crucified?
There was darkness over all the land.
What more happened?
The earth did quake, and the graves opened.
Where did they bury the body of Jesus?
In a grave cut out of a rock.
What did his enemies do?
They fastened the grave, and set soldiers to watch it.
How long did the body of Jesus lie in the grave?
Till the third day.
What happened when the Lord rose from the dead?
A mighty angel came from heaven, and there was a great earthquake.
What else happened?
The bodies of many of the saints came out of their graves.
CHAPTER VII. CHRIST SEEN BY THE DISCIPLES—HIS ASCENSION AND INTERCESSION.
Did our Lord show himself after he rose from the dead?
Yes, very often.
Who saw him?
All the apostles, and many others, saw him.
Were they sure he was the very same Jesus that had been crucified, dead, and buried?
Yes; they knew him to be the very same.
How did they know it?
They talked with him, handled him, and saw the marks of the cross on his body.
What after this became of his body?
He went up in it into heaven.
Did the body of our Lord Jesus go up into heaven just as it was in the grave, without any change?
No; it was changed into a glorious body.
Did any one see him go up into heaven?
Yes; his disciples looked up after him.
How did he go up?
A cloud parted him from them, and he went up into heaven.
Does he now do anything for us in heaven?
He ever lives to pray for us.
CHAPTER VIII. THE JUDGMENT.
Will the Lord Jesus come down again out of heaven?
Yes, at the last day.
What will he come for?
To judge all men.
How will he come?
In glory: with all the holy angels.
What will happen then?
The trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised.
What will be done to them that are alive at that day?
They shall be changed in a moment.
What will happen to the world?
The heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the earth shall be burned up.
What will become of mankind then?
The righteous shall be taken up into heaven, but the wicked shall be turned into hell.
CHAPTER IX. WHO ARE RIGHTEOUS—HOW WE BECOME, AND CONTINUE SO.
Who will be reckoned righteous in the day of judgment?
Such as believe the gospel and live by it.
What will become of little children, and them that know not right from wrong?
They will be reckoned righteous for Christ's sake.
How must we believe the gospel, so as for it to make us righteous?
We must take it to our heart for God's truth, and love it.
Can we turn our own heart to believe the gospel, and love it?
No: we must pray for grace to turn our heart.
Who works this grace in us to turn our heart?
The Holy Ghost.
Can our sins be forgiven us?
Yes, for Christ's sake.
What must we do for our sins to be forgiven?
God will forgive us, only for Christ's sake.
But will he forgive us if we take no pains about it?
No; we must confess our sins, and pray, believing in Jesus.
But must not our heart be sorry, and hate sin?
Yes; we must be sorry, and hate sin, and put it away from us.
How can we do all this?
The Holy Ghost works it in us to feel right and do right.
If our sins are forgiven, and we get a new heart, can we fall away and lose it?
Yes; Adam fell away, and Judas fell away, and we can fall too.
How must we live so as not to fall from God's grace?
We must deny ourself, and take up our cross daily, and follow Jesus.
CHAPTER X. PARTICULAR DUTIES.
What is your duty to God?
To love him with all my heart, and soul, and strength, and so to worship him, and serve him.
What is a child's duty to his father and mother?
To love them, honor them, comfort them, and mind what they say.
What is a servant's duty to his master and mistress?
To serve them with a good will heartily, and not with eye-service.
What is the duty of a husband to his wife?
To love her, and cherish her, as Christ loves the church.
What is the duty of a wife to her husband?
To honor and love him, as her head.
What is the duty of brothers and sisters?
To be patient, kind, and loving to one another.
What is your duty to all men?
To do to them as I would have them do to me.
What is your duty to your enemies?
To love them, and pray for them.
What is your duty to them that do you any wrong?
To forgive them, as I pray God to forgive me.
What is the duty of parents to their children?
To be tender to them, and bring them up in the fear of God.
CHAPTER XI. THE CREED.
*What is your belief?
I believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth; and in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son, our Lord; who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried; the third day he rose from the dead; he ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father almighty; from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
I believe in the Holy Ghost; the holy catholic church; the communion of saints; the forgiveness of sins; the resurrection of the body; and the life everlasting.
* You believe in God the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; are these three Gods, or only one God?
The Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are one God.
*Can you tell how these three are one God?
No; we cannot find out God.
*How, then, can you believe that it is so?
Because God says it is so.
You believe that the Son of God was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary: can you tell how that could be?
No; but God knows; nothing is hard for him.
Who was Pontius Pilate?
The governor that let the Jews crucify Jesus.
What do you mean by the catholic church?
It means the church of Christ.
Who belong to this church?
All true Christians.
What makes us call it the catholic church?
Because it is free for all people, if they repent and believe in our Lord Jesus Christ.
CHAPTER XII. THE SACRAMENTS.
1. *What is baptism?
Baptism is a sign of the grace of God that makes us Christians.
2. *Does baptism make us Christians?
No; water cannot make us Christians; grace makes us Christians.
3. *Who works that grace in us to make us Christians?
The Holy Ghost.
4. *What do you promise when you come to be baptized?
I promise to renounce the devil, and the world, and the flesh, so that I will not live in sin any longer.
*What other promise do you make?
I promise to keep God's holy will and commandments.
*How can you keep these promises?
I can keep them only by God's grace.
*Ought little children to be baptized?
Yes; they belong to Christ.
5. *What is the sacrament of the Lord's supper taken for?
In remembrance of our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us.
*What does the bread of this holy sacrament show to us?
It shows Christ's body broken for us.
*What does the cup show us?
The blood of Christ shed for us.
*Who ought to take this sacrament?
All Christian people.
*How often ought we to take it?
As often as we can.
*How ought we to take it?
With an humble, loving heart, sorry for sin.
6. *Is it not very wicked for people to take the sacrament when they live in known sin; and, in particular, if they have any quarrel, or grudge against one another?
Yes; if we take the sacrament so, we make it worse for us.
THE LORD'S PRAYER.
Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come; thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil; for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.
I.
Thou shalt have none other gods but me.
II.
Thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image, nor the likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I, the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; and show mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.
III.
Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.
IV.
Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day. Six days shalt thou labor, and do all that thou hast to do; but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt do no manner of work; thou and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, thy cattle, and the stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.
V.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.
VI.
Thou shalt do no murder.
VII.
Thou shalt not commit adultery.
VIII.
Thou shalt not steal.
IX.
Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
X.
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is his.
SELECT PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE
THE LORD'S SUPPER.
The Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. xi, verses 23 to 28.
The Lord Jesus, the same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my body, which is broken for you. This do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me: for as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he come. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup.
DUTY TO A BROTHER OR SISTER IN THE CHURCH.
The Gospel by St. Matthew, chap. xviii, verses 15 to 17.
Moreover, if thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother: but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church; but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a publican.
DUTIES OF HUSBANDS AND WIVES.
Wives, submit yourselves unto your husbands, as unto the Lord: for the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church. Therefore, as the church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands in everything.
Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it. So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself. Let every one of you, in particular, so love his wife even as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband. Ephesians v, 22-33.
DUTIES OF PARENTS AND CHILDREN.
Children, obey your parents, in the Lord, for this is right. Honor thy father and mother, that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth.
And ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath; but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Ephesians vi, 1-14.
THE DUTY OF SERVANTS.
Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ. Not with eye-service as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart. Ephesians vi, 5, 6.
Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God, and his doctrine, be not blasphemed. And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them because they are brethren, but rather do them service because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things teach and exhort. 1 Tim. vi, 1, 2.
DUTY TO THOSE WHO INJURE US.
Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you, That ye resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. Matthew v, 38-44.
OUR DUTY TO ALL MEN.
All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law and the prophets. Matthew vii, 12.
OF ADULTERY.
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery. But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. Matthew v, 27, 28.
The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause? And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female; and said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and they twain shall be one flesh? What therefore God hath joined together let not man put asunder. And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery; and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery. Matthew xix, 3-9.
AGAINST THEFT AND OTHER CRIMES.
Every one that stealeth shall be cut off. Zechariah v, 3.
Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul. Proverbs xxix, 24.
By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood. Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein shall languish. Hosea iv, 2, 3.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived. Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, NOR THIEVES, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. 1 Corinthians vi, 9, 10.
AGAINST SWEARING.
But above all things, my brethren, swear not; neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath; but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, lest ye fall into condemnation. James v, 12.
AGAINST SABBATH-BREAKING.
Ye bring more wrath upon Israel, by profaning the Sabbath. Nehemiah xiii, 18.
And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day. And the Lord said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to death; all the congregation shall stone him with stones, without the camp. And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned him with stones, and he died; as the Lord commanded Moses. Numbers xv, 32-36.
AGAINST LYING.
All LIARS shall have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Revelation xxi, 8.
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have a right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city, (heaven.) For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, AND WHOSOEVER LOVETH AND MAKETH A LIE. Revelation xxii, 14, 15.
ORIGINAL HYMNS.
HYMN 1.
4 lines 7's

1 Children, join with one accord,
Join in praises to the Lord;
Join to sing the Saviour's name,
Sing hosanna to the Lamb.


2 Hail him Prophet, Priest, and King,
Louder, sweeter, children, sing;
Hail him by his fav'rite name,
Sing hosanna to the Lamb.


3 Men, and women, join to raise
Loud hosannas to his praise;
Praise the great Redeemer's name,
Sing hosanna to the Lamb.


4 Praise him, all ye hosts above,
Praise him, praise him for his love;
Glory give to Jesus' name,
Hallelujah to the Lamb.

HYMN 2.

1 Might a little child at prayer,
Hope to meet with Jesus there?
Tell me, Christians, can it be?
Can the Lord come down to me?
When, alas! I have been bad,
And my heart feels sore and sad,
And I know not what to say,
Will he bless me if I pray?


2 Yes; he'll meet thee, little one;
Bid thy doubts and fears be gone:
Yes, he'll bless thee if thou pray,
Though thou know'st not what to say.
For the love he bears to thee,
By the cross on Calvary,
He will meet thee, he will bless,
He will bid thee go in peace.

HYMN 3.

1 As Jesus his disciples taught
His Father's will to do,
Parents their little children brought,
That he might bless them too.


2 “Forbid them,” the disciples cried,
“Nor make them any room:”
“Forbid them not,” the Lord replied,
“But suffer them to come.


3 “Who, than the lambs, the Shepherd's care,
More fitly might receive?
And these my heavenly kingdom share:
I bless them, and they live.”


4 Then in his arms he took them up,
And on them laid his hands:
Joy to the world for Israel's hope,
And Jesus' kind commands.

HYMN 4.

1 There is a narrow way
That leads to heaven and God;
But sinners love to go astray,
And take a broader road.


2 They will not seek the Lord,
And pray to be forgiven;
They will not mind his holy word,
And so they miss of heaven.


3 Lord, we are sinners too;
But O, our sins forgive!
And teach us what we ought to do,
And how we ought to live!

HYMN 5.

1 In every place
The God of grace
Is very near
To hear our prayer;
And all we say,
By night or day,
And all we do,
He knows it too.


2 Then let us try
From sin to fly,
And speak and do
What's right and true;
And since God hears
Our humble prayers,
Still let us pray,
Both night and day.

HYMN 6.

1 Lord, teach me how to pray,
Teach me to love it too;
And grant thy Holy Spirit may
Make all my nature new.


2 I want to be thy child,
I want my sins forgiven;
I want a spirit meek and mild,
I want to get to heaven.


3 Do show me, Lord, the way;
And guide me on the road;
And let me never go astray
Till I get home to God.

HYMN 7.

1 Alas! how soon, and we must die!
We fear to think of death so nigh:
Our body dust, our life a breath,
Alas! how soon we sink in death!


2 But let us humbly trust the Lord,
And love his grace, and mind his word,
The dust shall rise, and death may be
The gate of heaven to you and me.

SELECTED.
HYMN 8.
4 lines 7's.

1 Poor and needy though I be,
God, my Maker, cares for me;
Gives me clothing, shelter, food;
Gives me all I have of good.


2 He will listen when I pray,
He is with me night and day,
When I sleep, and when I wake,
Keep me safe for Jesus' sake.


3 He who reigns above the sky
Once became as poor as I;
He whose blood for me was shed
Had not where to lay his head.


4 Though I labor here awhile,
He will bless me with his smile;
And when this short life is past,
I shall rest with him at last.

HYMN 9.

1 O that the Lord would guide my ways,
To keep his precepts still!
O that my God would grant me grace,
To know and do his will!


2 O send thy Spirit down, to write
Thy law upon my heart!
Nor let my tongue indulge deceit,
Nor act the liar's part!


3 Make me to walk in thy commands,
'Tis a delightful road;
Nor let my feet, or heart, or hands,
Offend against my God.

HYMN 10.

1 This day belongs to God alone,
He chooses Sunday for his own;
And we should neither work nor play,
Because it is the Sabbath day.


2 'Tis good to have one day in seven,
That we may learn the way to heaven;
Or else we never should have thought
About religion as we ought.


3 Then let us spend it as we should,
In serving God, and growing good;
And be the better every day,
For what we heard the preacher say.


4 And let this holy day be pass'd,
As if we knew it were our last;
For what would dying people give
To have one sabbath more to live!

HYMN 11.

1 Come, ye sinners, poor and needy,
Weak and wounded, sick and sore,
Jesus ready stands to save you,
Full of pity, love, and power;
He is able,
He is willing, doubt no more.


2 Now, ye needy, come, and welcome,
God's free bounty glorify;
True belief, and true repentance,
Every grace that brings you nigh;
Without money,
Come to Jesus Christ and buy.


3 Come, ye weary, heavy laden,
Bruised and mangled by the fall,
If you tarry till you're better,
You will never come at all;
Not the righteous,
Sinners Jesus came to call.

HYMN 12.

1 Jesus, my strength, my hope,
On thee I cast my care;
With humble confidence look up,
And know thou hear'st my prayer.


2 Give me on thee to wait,
Till I can all things do;
On thee, almighty to create,
Almighty to renew.


3 I want a heart to pray,
To pray, and never cease;
Never to murmur at thy stay,
Or wish my suff'rings less.


4 This blessing, above all,
Always to pray, I want;
Out of the deep on thee to call,
And never, never faint.


5 I rest upon thy word,
Thy promise is for me,
My help and my salvation, Lord,
Shall surely come from thee.

HYMN 13.

1 Arise, my soul, arise,
Shake off thy guilty fears,
The bleeding Sacrifice
In thy behalf appears;
Before the throne my Surety stands,
My name is written on his hands.


2 He ever lives above,
For me to intercede;
His all-redeeming love,
His precious blood to plead;
His blood atoned for all our race,
And sprinkles now the throne of grace.


3 Five bleeding wounds he bears,
Received on Calvary;
They pour effectual prayers,
They strongly speak for me:
Forgive him, O forgive, they cry,
Nor let that ransom'd sinner die.


4 The Father hears him pray,
His dear anointed One;
He cannot turn away
The presence of his Son:
The Spirit answers to the blood,
And tells me I am born of God.

HYMN 14.

1 Alas, and did my Saviour bleed,
And did my Sovereign die?
Would he devote that sacred head
For such a worm as I?


2 Was it for crimes that I have done
He groan'd upon the tree?
Amazing pity! grace unknown!
And love beyond degree!


3 Well might the sun in darkness hide,
And shut his glories in,
When Christ, the mighty Maker, died,
For man, the creature's sin.


4 Thus might I hide my blushing face,
While his dear cross appears;
Dissolve my heart in thankfulness,
And melt my eyes to tears.


5 But drops of grief can ne'er repay
The debt of love I owe;
Here, Lord, I give myself away,
'Tis all that I can do.

HYMN 15.
4 lines 7's.

1 Loving Jesus, gentle Lamb,
In thy gracious hands I am;
Make me, Saviour, what thou art,
Live thyself within my heart.


2 I shall then show forth thy praise,
Serve thee all my happy days;
Then the world shall always see
Christ, the holy child, in me.

HYMN 16.

1 Jesus, my all, to heaven is gone,
He whom I fix my hopes upon;
His track I see, and I'll pursue
The narrow way, till him I view.


2 The way the holy prophets went,
The road that leads from banishment;
The King's highway of holiness,
I'll go, for all his paths are peace.


3 This is the way I long have sought,
And mourn'd because I found it not;
My grief a burden long has been,
Because I was not saved from sin.


4 The more I strove against its power,
I felt its weight and guilt the more;
Till late I heard my Saviour say,
Come hither, soul, I am the way.


5 Lo, glad I come, and thou, bless'd Lamb,
Shalt take me to thee, whose I am;
Nothing but sin have I to give,
Nothing but love shall I receive.


6 Then will I tell to sinners round
What a dear Saviour I have found,
I'll point to thy redeeming blood,
And say, Behold the way to God!

HYMN 17.

1 When I can read my title clear
To mansions in the skies,
I'll bid farewell to every fear,
And wipe my weeping eyes.


2 Should earth against my soul engage,
And fiery darts be hurl'd,
Then I can smile at Satan's rage,
And face a frowning world.


3 Let cares like a wild deluge come,
Let storms of sorrow fall,
So I but safely reach my home,
My God, my heaven, my all.


4 There I shall bathe my weary soul
In seas of heavenly rest,
And not a wave of trouble roll
Across my peaceful breast.

HYMN 18.

1 Am I a soldier of the cross,
A follower of the Lamb?
And shall I fear to own his cause,
Or blush to speak his name?


2 Must I be carried to the skies
On flowery beds of ease,
While others fought to win the prize,
And sail'd through bloody seas?


3 Are there no foes for me to face?
Must I not stem the flood?
Is this vile world a friend to grace,
To help me on to God?


4 Sure I must fight if I would reign.
Increase my courage, Lord;
I'll bear the toil, endure the pain,
Supported by thy word.


5 Thy saints in all this glorious war
Shall conquer, though they die;
They see the triumph from afar,
By faith they bring it nigh.


6 And when that glorious day shall rise,
And all thy people shine,
In robes of victory through the skies,
The glory shall be thine.

HYMN 19.

1 Hungry, and faint, and poor,
Behold us, Lord, again,
Assembled at thy mercy's door,
Thy bounty to obtain.


2 Thy word invites us nigh,
Or we should starve indeed;
For we no money have to buy,
No righteousness to plead.


3 The food our spirits want
Thy hand alone can give;
O hear the prayer of faith, and grant
That we may eat and live.

HYMM 20.

1 Try us, O God, and search the ground
Of every sinful heart;
Whate'er of sin in us is found,
O bid it all depart!


2 When to the right or left we stray,
Leave us not comfortless;
But guide our feet into the way
Of everlasting peace.


3 Help us to help each other, Lord,
Each other's cross to bear;
Let each his friendly aid afford,
And feel his brother's care.


4 Help us to build each other up,
Our little stock improve;
Increase our faith, confirm our hope,
And perfect us in love.


5 Up into thee, our living Head,
Let us in all things grow;
Till thou hast made us pure indeed,
And spotless here below.


6 Then when the mighty work is wrought,
Receive thy ready bride;
Give us in heaven a happy lot,
With all the sanctified.

HYMN 21.
4 lines 7's.

1 Lord, we come before thee now,
At thy feet we humbly bow;
O do not our suit disdain!
Shall we seek thee, Lord, in vain?


2 Lord, on thee our souls depend!
In compassion now descend!
Fill our hearts with thy rich grace,
Tune our lips to sing thy praise.


3 In thine own appointed way,
Now we seek thee, here we stay;
Lord, we know not how to go,
Till a blessing thou bestow.


4 Comfort those who weep and mourn,
Let the time of joy return;
Them that are cast down lift up,
Make them strong in grace and hope.


5 Grant that all may seek and find,
Thee a gracious God and kind;
Heal the sick, the captive free,
Let us all rejoice in thee.

HYMN 22.

1 A charge to keep I have,
A God to glorify;
A never-dying soul to save,
And fit it for the sky.


2 To serve the present age,
My calling to fulfill;
O may it all my powers engage,
To do my Master's will!


3 Arm me with jealous care,
As in thy sight to live;
And O, thy servant, Lord, prepare,
A strict account to give!


4 Help me to watch and pray,
And on thyself rely;
Assured if I my trust betray,
I shall for ever die.

HYMN 23.

1 Come, thou Fount of every blessing,
Tune my heart to sing thy grace;
Streams of mercy, never ceasing,
Call for songs of loudest praise.
Teach me some melodious sonnet,
Sang by flaming tongues above;
Praise the mount; I'm fix'd upon it,
Mount of thy redeeming love.


2 Here I'll raise my Ebenezer,
Hither by thy help I'm come;
And I hope, by thy good pleasure,
Safely to arrive at home.
Jesus sought me when a stranger,
Wand'ring from the fold of God;
He, to save my soul from danger,
Freely shed his precious blood.


3. O to grace how great a debtor
Daily I'm constrain'd to be!
Let thy goodness, like a fetter,
Bind my wand'ring heart to thee.
Prone to wander, Lord, I feel it,
Prone to leave the God I love;
Here's my heart; O take and seal it,
Seal it for thy courts above.


Praise God, from whom all blessings flow,
Praise him, all creatures here below;
Praise him above, ye heavenly host,
Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.


To God the Father, God the Son,
And God the Spirit, Three in One,
Be honor, praise, and glory given,
By all on earth, and all in heaven.


Now let the Father, and the Son,
And Spirit be adored,
Where there are works to make him known,
Or saints to love the Lord.


To God the Father, Son,
And Spirit, One in Three,
Be glory as it was, is now,
And shall for ever be.


Lord, dismiss us with thy blessing,
Bid us now depart in peace;
Still on heavenly manna feeding,
Let our faith and love increase.


Fill each breast with consolation;
Up to thee our hearts we raise;
When we reach our blissful station,
Then we'll give thee nobler praise.

[Back Cover Image]