
[Cover Image]
[Title Page Image]
“FALLING FROM GRACE.” A SERMON
TEXT: “Whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen from Grace.”—Galatians 5th chap, part 4th verse.
And now, my dear brethren and congregation, the first proposition of the text treats upon the subject of justification, and I wish to give a clear explanation upon the subject, so that the eyes of your understanding may be enlightened; that you may know the hope of your calling; for some have not had the knowledge of justification;— hearken and hear what justification is: Justification is to be made free from sin and become reconciled to God through the atoning merits of Jesus Christ, which made a perfect reconciliation between God and man, and not by any work which we have done; for we are saved by Grace through faith in the Redeemer's blood. Therefore, if any of you think that you have done good enough to free you from sin without faith in the Redeemer's blood, ye are yet under the penalty of the law. And again, the law cannot have any compassion upon sin. Why? For sin is the transgression of the law. Hark! And again, the holy law saith, “The soul that sinneth shall die.” And again, the Holy Scripture saith we all have sinned and the law has assumed the debt for sin, and it was death; and Christ our Saviour paid our debt by His own blood, and has redeemed all who will believe on the only begotten Son of God, for by one offering he hath perfected forever them that are sanctified. And again, He saith: “This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days; I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds I will write them; and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.” And again, “Whom the Son setteth free are free indeed;” but “whomsoever of you are justified by the law, ye are fallen from Grace.” And the word fallen means going down through the depths of God's favor and mercy. But the Apostles did not say that they had received the Grace of God and had lost it. And again, the Apostles did not say that they were children of God by faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and had lost their faith; but the Apostles prove that their faith is in the law which cannot save them that putteth their trust therein; and again, as long as men trust in their own deeds for salvation they are fallen from grace. When they deny themselves and trust Christ for salvation He will catch the fallen sinner in the arms of His love. For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ; the law is the author of death because of sin, but grace is the author of life because of righteousness; therefore after the law has slain the sinner the law has finished its work, and then grace gives life again. Whosoever of you that are justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace. But the text did not say that they had fell from grace, but that they are falling from grace; and again it is very important to know what the grace of God is before you can declare that you have fell from grace, for grace is God's favor and mercy. Again, the text declares, “Ye that are justified by the law ye are fallen from grace,” but the text did not say that they had not fell from grace, but the text saith you that are justified by the law ye are fallen from grace. But some will say, How can you fall from grace before you receive it. I fancy to say ye that are fallen are fallen because you have not received the grace of God that is offered in the word of life. The Apostle saith, “the word is nigh them even in thy mouth and in thy heart, and this is the word of faith which we preach.” Therefore, if grace is in thy heart and then ye will not receive it what shall I more say but cry in the language of the text, ye that are justified by the law ye are fallen. Oh, hearken and look and see by faith one Jesus upon the cross with open arms; hark, his love and mercy is deeper than the depth of death, and his arms are extended and he saith believe on me and you shall be saved; although ye are fallen I will catch your soul before it falls through Mercy's last depth, yea before it falls through Mercy's last depth.
Again, another Scripture saith, “I am he that liveth and was dead; and, behold, I am alive evermore; and have the keys of hell and of death.” Therefore, if Christ has got the keys of death and hell, and he saith “because I live ye shall live,” and, again “whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him shall be in him as a well of water springing up into everlasting life;” and again, another scripture saith, “whosoever abideth in Him sinneth not, and whosoever sinneth hath not seen him and neither know him now.” There is another scriptural evidence, that “whosoever is born of the new birth in Christ cannot fall from grace,” but “ye that are justified by the law ye are fallen from grace,” and will continue to fall until you fall into the arms of Jesus. If you fall from his arms then I am sure you have fallen from grace and must enter hell, and there without remedy.
He that committeth sin is of the devil, for whosoever is born of God does not sin, for his seed remaineth in him and he cannot sin, because he is born of God; and again, ye are saved by grace through faith, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast, for men by nature are children of divine wrath, but the law is holy, just and good. Whoever of you that are justified by the law ye are fallen from grace.
And now my dear brethren and congregation, we plainly see that those who are justified by the law are the fallen subjects, because the law is just and holy, and whosoever counts themselves holy by their own good deeds are deceived and are overcome by their sinfulness of the flesh and are convinced of the law that they are sinners, and then they say that they have fell from grace. But I fancy to say that those that are fallen from grace have never been risen unto a new life in Christ Jesus our Lord; and they are not with us who believe in God through Christ, for we that believe are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets; and Jesus Christ is the chief foundation, and we cannot fall because he saith he that believes in me, “I am in him and he is in me and I am in the father,” and again “the law is our witness that we have passed from death unto life; for as in Adam all died even so in Christ shall all be made alive.”
Again, if the grace of God is mercy and favor, as the Doctors of Divinity of the different denominations have agreed upon, I shall prove that Adam did not fall from grace but that he fell from holiness and happiness, and when he fell from his holy state he fell into the arms of death; but we give God thanks that there was a foundation deeper than the depths of death, and this foundation is God's favor and mercy, which is the gift of Jesus.

Hark, I hear the Gospel's cheering sound,
The dead's alive and the lost is found.

Jesus is alive, he lives to die no more; and again, another Scripture saith, “My sheep hear my voice. I give them eternal life that they may never perish;” and again, “the law is our witness that we are built upon the foundation of the apostles and the prophets, and Jesus Christ is our chief foundation, sure and steadfast;” and again “we are more than conquerors through Him that loves us;” and the apostle saith, “neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
Whosoever of you that are justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace, but the arms of mercy are able to catch the falling sinner before he falls through the depth of mercy, and save him from the flames of fire. And again, when a sinner has fallen from grace he is a child of that wicked one, and has never known Christ in the pardon of his sins, for the scripture saith, “by their works ye shall know them;” and again, I John 2: 3, “and hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments;” and see chap. 3: 10, “In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother.” Hark, Paul in his epistle to the Romans, chap. 14: 4, says, “Who art thou that judgest another man's servant? to his own master he standeth or falleth; yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to make him stand.”
And again, I wish to ask this question: “Can Satan blot out the blood of Christ which restores us to the new fellowship with God? (and ‘by faith we are made heirs and joint heirs with Christ,’). If ye are so weak as to believe that Satan can overrule God and blot out the image of his Son ye are not a fit subject for the Kingdom of God; for he that esteemeth Satan equal with God he has denied the Father and the Son, for Jesus saith “whom the Son shall set free are free indeed.”
And now may the Grace of God and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with you all now and forever. Amen.
A SERMON ON THE SUBJECT OF BAPTISM.
TEXT: Mark 16th Chapter, 15th and 16th Verses.
“Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature: he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned.”
And now I wish to give a clear explanation upon the subject of Baptism, for there has been so much said upon this matter, and it is so hard to be understood by those that believe not. Now my dear brethren and congregation and all that will hear this, I call your attention to this important subject, for it is worthy of our notice, for it is the commission of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I fancy to say, according to the gospel, “he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.” This cannot be truthfully denied. “He that believeth not shall be damned.” The text saith “go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.” Every human being that can hear and understand, for “faith cometh by hearing and hearing by the word of God.”
Again, our Saviour saith, “when any one heareth the word of the kingdom and understandeth not, then cometh the wicked one and taketh away that which is in his heart,” catcheth away that which is sown in his heart, that is, to hinder him from obeying the truth of the gospel, for the word of the kingdom is the truth of the gospel which shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations. Again, the Scripture saith, “whoso readeth let him understand.” So then I fancy to say that the Messiah did not leave His Apostles without understanding, when He said unto them “go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature: he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.” For I am persuaded that the Apostles understood the meaning of this word baptize; but some men say there are more ways than one to administer baptism, but I fancy to say that this is the doctrine of men, for the Scripture saith, “if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for battle,” and if the Messiah give an uncertain way to administer baptism, how shall the people or how shall the minister know when he has baptized those that believe? I am fully persuaded that believers are the proper subjects for baptism, and this is that which I shall prove by the evidence of the apostolic doctrine, for the Scripture declares that “when they believed they were baptized both men and women,” but not before they believed, and it is evident that they could not believe until they heard the Word of Life and understood it. And again some men teach this false doctrine which do not bear witness with Scripture, and that is this, they say “be baptized first and then believe,” but I fancy to say that is contrary to the doctrine of the apostles; and we are taught by the Scriptures to “mark them which cause dissensions and offences contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them.” Avoid them, believe them not, because their doctrine and practice are not Scriptural. The Holy Scripture is the voice of God, speaking through his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord, and “he that believeth not shall be damned.”
“He that believeth not shall be damned,” because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, and for this cause shall God send them strong delusion that they should believe a lie, that they all might be condemned that believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Paul to the Thessolonians, 2d chapter, 11-12 verses: “Therefore, brethren, stand fast in the doctrine of the Apostles which you have been taught, for the wicked shall not stand in judgment, for the Lord shall consume them with the spirit of his mouth and he shall shine them away by the brightness of his coming. Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature, he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned.” All the world where men are found preach the gospel—proclaim the glad tidings of salvation through Jesus Christ. He that believes; he that receives the testimony of God and is baptized, (that is, dipping or immersing the believer in water in the name of the Holy Trinity,) he shall be saved, he shall be set apart for Heaven.
Baptism did not come in the place of circumcision, but was ordained for the new Covenant, for if baptism came in the place of circumcision, what was Jesus baptized for? He had received circumcision and then He was baptized. Circumcision was of the old Covenant and the old Covenant was of the law, but the new covenant is the Gospel system. Again, “go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and ye are witnesses of these things.” And again: “behold I send the promise of my Father upon you, but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem until ye be inbued with power from on high.” When the day of Pentecost was fully come “they were all with one accord in one place, and there came a sound from Heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.” And again: “when they heard this they were pricked to their hearts and said unto Peter and the other Apostles, ‘what shall we do?’ Then Peter said unto them, ‘repent and be baptized, every one of you,’ and they that gladly received the word were baptized.” Receive the word, believe the word. Again: “when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized;” and again: “Philip preached Jesus unto the Eunuch, and the Eunuch said, ‘see here is water, what doth hinder me to be baptized?’ and Philip said, ‘if thou believe with all thy heart thou mayest,’ and he said, ‘I do believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.’ And they went both down into the water, and Philip baptized him with water, and not with the Holy Ghost; for Peter said, “who can deny water that these should be baptized which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we, and he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus.” I am certain the Apostles could not be deceived, for I fancy to say that God did send John to baptize with water, but He sent His Son to baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire. He that believeth and is baptized with water in the name of the Holy Trinity, he shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Again: he that believeth not shall be baptized with fire, that is, he shall receive the fiery wrath of God's avenging law, for Christ did not promise to baptize his apostles with fire, but He said unto them, “ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.” Hark again. Paul to Romans, 13 chap. 2d verse: “Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive unto themselves damnation.” And again we must confess that baptism is the ordinance of God; and again: ministers of all denominations that wish to save souls, must be wise enough to put their knowledge into the knowledge of God, and then they will clothe themselves with Godliness. And again: “John was baptizing in Enon, near Salem, because there was much water there, and they came and were baptized;” but these that John baptized were baptized unto repentance, yea, to prove that they confessed their sins, and they that would not confess their sins, he would not baptize them with water. And again: he that does not believe cannot be scripturally baptized; and again, he that doth believe the gospel, cannot renounce the water baptism. “What doth hinder me to be baptized?” “If thou believe with all thy heart thou mayest,” and he said, “I do believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and he baptized him.” “He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.”
Scriptural baptism is the outward sign of the inward faith in Jesus' blood, and that leads us that do believe to confess the Lord Jesus by the water baptism. But whosoever renounces the water baptism, and then saith they are baptized with the Holy Ghost, they are deceived. “Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature: he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned.” He that hears and has the ability to understand, and does understand, but will not obey the gospel, he shall be damned. And again, scriptural baptism is essential to salvation, for baptism professes to hate sin and corruptions, and professes a new life in Christ Jesus. “Arise and be baptized and wash away your sins.” Infants are not charged with sin until they can understand, therefore they are not proper subjects for baptism; and if we baptize them before they can renounce their sin, their baptism is nothing, for their sins are dead and their baptism is dead; his baptism was put on him over his sin, before he renounced his sin, and of course when he renounces his sin, he must renounce his baptism, which was put on him over his sin; for his sin was put on him by Adam, and he must pull it off by the knowledge of Jesus, and then put on Christ by baptism, and he shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.
Again: all true religious practice is based upon the doctrine of the Bible, and all religious practice which is not found in the Bible is utterly false, and it is not the worship of God, but it is the worship of men, for all true religion can find rest in the Bible. Again: some saith that baptism is not essential to salvation, but the Scriptures declare that “men shall live by every word of God,” and if believers are baptized in the name of the Holy Trinity, it is essential to salvation, for God commands us what to do through Christ, and Christ commands us to believe and be baptized in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
And now may the God of peace and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.
A SERMON ON THE SUBJECT OF PREDESTINATION.
TEXT; “For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son,”—Romans, 8: 29.
The first proposition of the text treats of the foreknowledge of God, which is an important subject. We are taught by the Scriptures that the invisible things of Him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made—even his eternal power and Godhead—even his eternal power to make what we see; and that the visible things of Him teaches us of His power, yea, His everlasting power, yea and His Godhead, His foreknowledge to know all His people whom He chose to dwell in the light of His countenance. And now I will illustrate upon the foreknowledge of men—for men do have a future thought of things to suit the wishes of their minds, and men do have a foreknowledge even in constructing their farms, and their buildings, and all other things that are connected with the pleasures of this life. And now, my dear brethren, we must acknowledge that God did foreknow what subjects would please him. And again, I fancy to say that predestination does not destroy the free will of men to act as agents for themselves; for when the employer hires his tenants he first intends to pay them, and that should make them more willing to work that they may be paid, and then predestination and free agency is united together.
Hark; God speaks by Isaiah in chapter 55th, 8th and 9th verses, in language like this: “For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord; for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.” Then let us express our highest gratitude to God who did foreknow what was his pleasure, and also what was his displeasure. O, hearken, before God created the visible things—the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and all the created objects—He did foreknow that His word was the purest of all the created objects and He glorified it; and God's Word is His only begotten Son, and it pleased God that in his Word all fullness should dwell. And again, we beheld His glory—the glory of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth—and he was clothed with vesture dipped in blood, and His name was called the Word of God. And again, “For whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son,” for God did foreknow the objects of his choice. And again,“whom He did predestinate them He also called” to partake of His divine nature: he also called us by His Son, that we should return from sin's destructive ways to perform the services of his own will, and again, this is the will of the Fattier that we might know Him and Jesus Christ whom He has sent to call us with a holy calling; and again; this is the call of His Son, “except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.”
But some do not understand this being chosen in God before the foundation of the world; but this was God's choice in His son, and His son came down from heaven to do his Father's will, and to make his glory known, yea the glory that was hid in the Father before the world was created. But some men say if they were chosen in God before the world was, that they will be saved whether they exercise faith or not, or whether they pray or not; but all such men will see that they had lost their first fellowship with God by the sins of their forefathers, and that Christ came down and bore the cross and shame to restore them to the fellowship of the Father by the gift of His divine nature, which is the love that was in God before the foundation of the world. And again, the love of God that is in Christ has the power, through faith, to re-make all the attributes of God's choice of that same love that was in God before the world was created. But these objects are not re-made or regenerated without faith in God. And again, I wish it to be understood that the scripture saith that without faith it is impossible to please God; and again, God has commanded all men every where to repent that they may partake of his divine nature; and again, before God did lay the foundation of the earth and the heavens he looked to see who could hold them up, but in the midst of all the created objects He saw none but His own Word, and He did make a vessel of honor and put His word therein, and He made it low into the form of a man that it might be near unto us, even in us, that we by obeying the truth might be stamped into the image of the only begotten of the Father. And again, Jesus did not sit still and say “my Father can save the people whether I die for them or not,” but he said “it is meet that I should be about my Father's business;” and he should be our example. But these men that sit still and will not exercise faith in Christ are yet in darkness. Let us cast off the works of darkness by exercising faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, that we may receive his gracious promise of eternal life, even in his Son; and again, “behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us that we should be called the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him.”
Now I fancy to say that in this I do see three creations of men, and that is this: the first Adam was made a living soul, and the second Adam was the Lord from heaven, and was the new man which was made by God's own word; and again, of His own will he hath begotten us again by the word of truth. For God does change the work of His hands, but God is the same, and his love changes not; but we shall be changed from glory to glory, for our last creation shall take place when Christ shall appear.
And now may the God of peace be with you all. Amen.
LECTURE ON HUMANITY
Dear Readers: I publish this essay for the general good of our country; for the white people and the colored also. But this is particularly for the white people, for they are the stronger, and more able to do more good generally.
The good Lord will bless the strong for bearing the infirmity of the weak. How shall we have a good country without the aid of each other? The first step of a good country is to take notice that God is our only source of happiness. Secondly, we are God's creatures, and he has put us here to take care of his weak creatures—that the strong shall bear the infirmity of the weak. The question may be asked, how shall the strong help the weak, or how shall we have a good country? I will answer it, sir: by opening fields of labor of different capacities; and give the poor people employment—pay them reasonable wages—let them work faithfully, then the rich will be helping the poor and the poor the rich. The good Lord will bless our country, and the people will flourish like a rose. Again, open fields, of labor. I will name some of the fields. First, let the farmers plant their respective fields, hire laborers, and pay them reasonable wages. Secondly, let the respective merchants aid the poor farmers. Thirdly, let the Executive Committee erect school houses and employ teachers; and let the respective teachers give our children light. Let the people erect places of worship; and let the humble minister stand upon the hill and say to those in the valley, Thy God reigneth! Let the talented minister stand upon the highest mountain and say to those upon the hills, come up higher, for the Lord of hosts saith by Malachi, “bring ye all the tithes into the storehouses, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of host, if I will not open the windows of heaven and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to receive it. I will rebuke the devourer for your sake, they shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine cast her fruits before time in the field, saith the Lord of host. All nations shall call you blessed.”
Now, we will notice that our tithes that we must bring before God is, to love our neighbors, and to love the Lord with all our heart. Love is honest dealing, and friendly aid to each other; so let not the laborer cheat those who employ him, and let not those who employ cheat the laborer: for cheating is stealing, and stealing is contrary to the Lord's command. Who does not want a good country? If we want good times we must work for them.
The way to have a bad country is to grind the poor into the dust; then God will grind the rich into the dust, and we all will be miserable. “But I say awake to righteousness, and sin not, for some have not the knowledge of God.”