
[Cover Image]
[Spine Image]
[Frontispiece Image] [Signed] Very faithfully yrW. Gilmore Simms
[Title Page Image]
[Title Page Verso Image]
NORMAN MAURICE; OR, THE MAN OF THE PEOPLE.

DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

"NORMAN MAURICE."," "
"ROBERT WARREN,","his kinsman and enemy."
"RICHARD OSBORNE,","an attorney and creature of Warren."
"HARRY MATTHEWS,","a friend of Warren."
"COL. BLASINGHAME,","a fire-eater."
"BEN FERGUSON,","a leading politician."
"COL. MERCER,","Politicians of opposite party."
"COL. BROOKS,"
"MAJOR SAVAGE,","a friend of Blasinghame."
"CAPT. CATESBY, U. S. A.,","friend of Maurice."
"Citizens, Lawyers, &c."
"MRS. JERVAS,","a widow."
"CLARICE DELANCY,","her niece, afterwards wife to Maurice."
"WIDOW PRESSLEY,","a client of Maurice"
"KATE PRESSLEY,","her grand-daughter."
"BIDDY,","a servant girl."

NORMAN MAURICE.
ACT I.—SCENE 1.
SCENE II.
SCENE III.
SCENE IV.
ACT II.—SCENE I.
SCENE II.
SCENE III.
SCENE IV.
SCENE V.
SCENE VI.
ACT III.—SCENE I.
SCENE II.
SCENE III.
ACT IV.—SCENE I.
SCENE II.
SCENE III.
SCENE IV.
ACT V.—SCENE I.
SCENE II.
SCENE III.
SCENE IV.
SCENE V.
SCENE VI.
SCENE VII.
ATALANTIS; A STORY OF THE SEA.

“'Tis not vain or fabulous,—
Though so esteem'd by shallow ignorance,—
What the sage Poets, taught by th' heavenly Muse,—
Storied of old in high immortal verse,—
Of dire chimeras and enchanted isles,—
And rifted rocks.”—MILTON.

THE first edition of “Atalantis” was published in 1832. It has been subsequently revised, and, I trust, amended. I am not satisfied that the dramatic form was appropriately adopted, since it leads to expectations which the character of the poem will scarcely satisfy. The advantage of the dialogue consists simply in permitting that diversification of the descriptive portions, which, in a work so purely fanciful, would seem necessary to prevent monotony.—This poem, with those pieces which follow it, belongs to a class, the standards of which are almost entirely imaginative. The reader who looks here for the merely human sentiment, will find himself at fault. The province of poetry is too various for the application of laws derived wholly from individual tastes; and he who opens the pages of an author must always be prepared to ascend that mount of vision from which he has made his survey. The highest regions of the ideal, are unquestionably such as belong to the spiritual nature. To this nature, exclusively, verse which is solely imaginative must commend itself. It is not the less human, though it may be more remote and foreign, than that which simply appeals to mortal passions, and the more earthly purposes of man and life.
PERSONS OF THE POEM.

"ONESIMARCHUS,","a King of Sea-Demons."
"COUNT LEON,","a noble Spanish Knight."
"MENDEZ CELER,","Captain of the Arragon."
"OGRÉ,","a slave of Onesimarchus. Mariners, Demons, &c., &c."


"ATALANTIS,","a Princess of the Nereids."
"NEA,","her attendant."
"LADY ISABEL,","sister to Count Leon."


"ZEPHYR-SPIRIT."," "
"TININA,","Fairies."
"CARETA,"
"NANITA,"
"LOLINE,"

ATALANTIS.
ACT I.—SCENE I.
SCENE II.—The same.
SONG OF THE SHELL-SPIRIT.

I.
I am of the sprites of ocean,
Dweller there, the gentlest one,
And I take my airy motion,
When the day is done;
It is mine, the voice that rouses
All the lovely tribes of sea,
From their tiny coral houses,
Glad to wake with me.


II.
When the sun, in ocean sinking,
Leaves to fairy power the earth,
When the night stars, slowly winking,
Bid the winds have birth:
Gently o'er the waters stealing,
Mine's the song that sweetly flies
Wooing to one common feeling
Ocean, earth, and skies.


III.
Loveliest of the zephyr's daughters,
Born to breathe in bloom and shine,
I can still the angry waters
With a breath of mine.
Not a stronger spirit rideth
O'er the rolling waves than I;
Not a lovelier shape abideth
'Neath the tropic sky.

SONG OF CORALINE.

I.
Be at my side when the winds are awaking,
Each from his cave, in the depths of the night;
Fly to our groves, till the daylight comes breaking,
Fresh from the east with his tremulous light.
When the stars peer out in the blue deeps of even,
When the crowd is at rest, and the moon soars apace,
Silent and sad, through the watches of heaven,
Be thou, beloved, at the love-hallow'd place:
Come in thy beauty and lightness,
Bright-eyed and free-footed, oh! dearest one, come,
Filling the dark wood with brightness
And crowning the green hill with bloom;—
Such bloom—the heart-chosen for thousand sweet groves,
As is dear to the wood-nymphs and born of their loves.


II.
In the spirit of beauty, bewitchingly tender,
Fly to my bosom, beloved of my heart;
Thy lip bearing sweetness, thine eye giving splendor,
Thy smile shedding rapture wherever thou art;
And while the pale moonlight is round and above thee,
While the leaves twinkle soft in the breeze o'er thy
Hear, dearest rose of my heart, how I love thee,
And treasure, sweet spirit, my vow.
Come! while the night-gems are glowing,
Each in his orb, over forest and sea,
Less glory, though bright in their beauty, bestowing
Than that which now hangs about thee.
Fly to me, blest, in this gentlest of hours,
Outshining the planets, outblooming the flowers.

ACT II.—SCENE I.

SONG OF THE ZEPHYR-SPIRIT.

I.
I have come from the deeps where the sea-maiden twines,
In her bowers of amber, her garlands of shells;
For a captive like thee, in her chamber she pines,
And weaves for thy coming the subtlest of spells;
She has breathed on the harpstring that sounds in her cave,
And the strain as it rose hath been murmur'd for thee;
She would win thee from earth for her home in the wave,
And her couch, in the coral grove, deep in the sea.


II.
Thou hast dream'd in thy boyhood of sea-circled bowers,
Where all may be found that is joyous and bright,—
Where life is a frolic through fancies and flowers,
And the soul lives in dreams of a lasting delight!
Wouldst thou win what thy fancies have taught to thy heart?
Wouldst thou dwell with the maiden now pining for thee?
Flee away from the cares of the earth, and depart
For her mansions of coral, far down in the sea.


III.
Her charms will beguile thee when noonday is nigh,
The song of her nymphs shall persuade thee to sleep,
She will watch o'er thy couch as the storm hurries by,
Nor suffer the sea-snake beside thee to creep;
But still with a charm which is born of the hours
Her love shall implore thee to bliss ever free;
Thou wilt rove with delight through her crystalline bowers,
And sleep without care in her home of the sea.


BALLAD.

I.
'Mong Lucayo's isles and waters,
Leaping to the evening light,
Dance the moonlight's silver daughters—
Tresses streaming, glances gleaming,
Ever beautiful and bright.


II.
And their wild and mellow voices,
Still to hear along the deep,
Every brooding star rejoices,
While the billow, on its pillow
Lull'd to silence, sinks to sleep.


III.
Yet they wake a song of sorrow,
Those sweet voices of the night;
Still from grief a gift they borrow,
And hearts shiver, as they quiver
With a wild and sad delight.


IV.
'Tis the wail for life they waken
By Samana's lonely shore;
With the tempest it is shaken,
The wide ocean is in motion,
And the song is heard no more.


V.
But the gallant bark comes sailing,
At her prow the chieftain stands;
He hath heard the tender wailing—
It delights him—it invites him
To the joys of other lands.


VI.
Bright the moonlight round and o'er him,
And, oh! see, a picture lies
In the yielding waves before him,—
Woman smiling, still beguiling
From the depths of wondrous eyes.


VII.
White arms toss above the waters,
Pleading murmurs fill his ears,
And the Queen of Ocean's daughters,
Heart alluring, love assuring,
Wins him down with tears.


VIII.
On, the good ship speeds without him,
By Samana's lonely shore;
They have wound their arms about him,
In the water's—ocean's daughters
Sadly singing as before.


ZEPHYR-SPIRIT.
In the billow before thee
My form is conceal'd—
In the breath that comes o'er thee
My thought is reveal'd—
Strown thickly beneath me
The coral rocks grow,
And the waves that enwreath me,
Are working thee woe.

ZEPHYR-SPIRIT

I.
By the planet at whose bid,
I must close the heavy lid,
Ere the hour that wings my flight
I unfold me to your sight,
That your wondering thoughts may find,
Wherewith to awake the mind;—
To arouse ye with a fear,
Do I sing and wanton here;
Sing with sorrow lest too late,
Ye awaken to your fate:
Hearken to my voice and fly,
For the danger lurketh nigh.


II.
Deem me not a form of ill,
Free to lure and injure still;—
Mine's the gentler task to save
From the perils of the wave.
When thou feel'st the tempest's shocks,
I send breezes off the rocks;
When the ocean's calm as death,
From me comes the tradewind's breath—
For my essence is not made
Of the cold and gloomy shade,
But of gentlest dews of night,
And of purest rays of light.


III.
Heed me then, and turn thy prow
From the rocks that wait thee now;—
Close beneath thee, do they sleep
In the hollows of the deep;
And thy sail is truly prone
Where the yellow sand is strown;
And no human power can save
From the terrors of the wave,
Smooth, and gently gliding, now,
With a whisper, round thy prow;
In an hour and all is o'er—
Thou wilt hear my voice no more.

SCENE II.—The Boat.
SCENE III.—The ocean waste.
SCENE IV.—The same.

I.
Fly! fly!
Through the perilous sky,
Spirits of terror and tumult on high!
Even as we go,
Working the woe,
Of all that is hatefully happy below!
Speed! our mission, fierce and fatal,
Is to spoil superior things;
For, at birth, our planets natal
Crown'd with blight our demon wings!
Oh! the joy to rob the treasures,
Hopes of soul and beauty given,
From the race whose purer pleasures,
Are the special care of Heaven!
Joy, that thus, still doom'd to sorrow,
We may happier fortunes blight,
And from woe extremest borrow,
Still the power that yields delight.
To the terror, fiercely wending,
Speed we, till our work is done,
Still destroying, raging, rending,
Till the shadow chokes the sun!


II.
Speed! for the meed
Of merciless deed,
Summons us fiercely with clamors of greed;
While the ship glides
Through the treacherous tides,
Break down her bulwarks and rush through her sides!
These are mortals, wretched creatures!
Yet from doom like ours set free;
Wrought of clay, and yet with features,
Such as make us rage to see!
Such the haughty sovereign presence,
That pursued with storm and flame!
From our homes of power and pleasaunce,
Drove us forth in grief and shame!
Him we dare not face with battle,
Now, as then, with fearless powers,
But his race of God-mark'd cattle,
Yields the proper spoil for ours.
In his likeness made, they languish,
For the wings he hath not given;
And, in trampling on their anguish,
Wage we still our war with Heaven!


III.
Why, oh! why,
Breathing the sky
Orisons still should they offer on high;
Why should they pray,
Creatures of clay,
Whose faith is a fable, whose life is a day!
Mock the mortals with your voices,
Shouting death and hate and hell;
Fill their ears with horrid noises,
Ring for every soul the knell!
Tell them, while the ocean smothers
Life and hope, that, never more,
Shall the loved ones, wives and mothers,
See the forms so dear before!
Show them Death in grimmest aspect,
Cold, corruption, worms, and night;
And depict the penal prospect
Of the future world of blight,
Endless, for the guilt-unshriven,
Fetter'd fast by tyrant powers,
With no hope to be forgiven,
And a doom more dread than ours!


IV.
Lo! where in sight,
Fierce as in fight,
Rising from ocean, our monarch of might;
With the storm for his steed,
He is here at our need,
The dreadful in strife, and the matchless in speed.
Full our legions,—dread battalions,
Sweep we now the ocean plain;
Cower the golden Spanish galleons,
Cower and sink beneath the main!
Vain the skill and power to stay us,
Vain the prayers that hope to spell;
Hate, alone, may soothe or sway us,
And the power that conquers hell!
These we dread not in our mission,
When the victim wrought of clay,
Guilty grown, in his condition,
Yields himself beneath our sway.
Then he forfeits angel keeping,
Which had baffled else our hate;
And the doom of woe and weeping,
Makes him subject to our fate!


CHORUS.
From the regions south, and the regions north,
Mount we, and speed we, and hurry we forth;
From where the sun fails, in the putrid gales,
Launch we afloat on our shadowy sails:
Darkening the sky, oh! how we fly,
Spirits of tumult and terror on high:
The whirlwind we fling abroad on its wing,
And the hurricane speeds to its work, as we sing!
Lo! the skies how they stoop, and the stars how they droop,
While the trailing storms follow our flight in a troop;
As downward we sweep, the black billows leap,
To welcome our flight, with a roar from the deep!
We are here, we are there; in the ocean, the air,
With a breath that is death, and a song that's despair!
Ho! for the master! The sulphur balls go!
How sweet is the shriek of the perishing foe!
Ho! for the master! The red arrows fly,
And burst in the blackness of billow and sky!
Papé Sathanas! We work for thee well!
Aleppé!* There's clucking for triumph in Hell!
Hear'st thou the groans of the victims?—They pray—
Ho! ho! but how vainly!—too late i' the day!
We stifle the prayer, in the breath—and we tear,
The last hope away from the breast of despair!
Ho! for new flights and new victims,—Ho! Ho!
With the tempest for wings, and the lightning we go.
Papé Sathanas! we work for thee well!
Aleppé! There's clucking for triumph in Hell!

* See Dante, Inferno, Canto vii:—“Pape Satan, pape Satan aleppe,Cominciò Pluto colla voce chioccia.”
SCENE V.—The Boat.
SCENE VI.—The Ocean waste.
ACT III.—SCENE I.
SONG OF THE FLOWER-SPIRIT.

I.
I am the spirit that sleeps in the flower,
Mine is the music of fragrance that flies,
When silence and moonlight are dressing each bower
That blooms in the favor of tropical skies:
I win the bird with new melody glowing,
To rise with the zephyr, and warble his strain;
And mine is the odor, in turn, that bestowing,
The minstrel is paid for his music again.


II.
Sorrow comes never where I am abiding,
The tempests are strangers, and far from us rove;
I woo the zephyrs too hurriedly riding,
And gently they linger and fill us with love.
They pause, and we glow in their winning embraces;
They drink our warm breath, rich with odor and song;
Then hurry away to their desolate places,
And look for us hourly, and mourn for us long.


III.
We were born of the dews, and our destiny found us,
Embraced by a sunbeam, all budding and bright;
On its wing, came from heaven the glory that crown'd us,
And the odor that makes us a living delight.
And when the warm blessings of summer stream on us,
Our winglets of silk we unfold to the air;
Leaping upward in joy to the spirit that won us,
And made us the tenants of regions so fair.

SCENE II.—The Same.
CHORUS OF FAIRIES.

I.
Lo, we come, we come, we come,
On the glassy moonbeams riding,
While no cloud, with eye of gloom,
Looks down on us chiding—
Where the silver sands spread out,
Fit for spirits gayly moving;
Tossing fruits and flowers about,
We are ever roving.


II.
Lo, we fly, we fly, we fly,
All the world about us viewing,
Now in sea and now in sky,
Still our sport pursuing.
Where the moon is shining clear,
Where the winds are met together,
Do we daily gather there,
In the summer weather.


III.
Lo, we dance, we dance, we dance,
On the land, and o'er the ocean;
Seizing on each happy chance,
With a glad commotion.
Where the summer's leaves are green,
Where the early birds are singing,
And the flowers are soonest seen,
We are with them springing.


IV.
Lo, we come, we come, we come,
On our wings of light descending;
Wings that breathe, like flowers in bloom,
Perfumes never ending.
On the shining sands we meet,
In the bright and gentle weather,
Each with something new and sweet,
Dancing all together.


FLIGHT OF FAIRIES, AND CHORUS.
We are they who fly by night,
When the maiden moon is bright,
And the silver beach is spread,
Out on ocean like a thread,
Meetly for a fairy's tread:
When the air of heaven is balm,
When the ocean waves are calm,
And the flowers of earth grow bright,—
We are they who fly by night!


The wind is on the wave, and the billow rolls away,
And the star that is the guide to the voyager is bright,
But the fickle wind may change, should the voyager delay,
And the star beneath the demon cloud may perish from the sight.
The will, and the wing, are both ready while I sing—
And the service that makes music as for love it labors still,
Hath no murmur for the ear, though it whispers still of care,
And implores that the season be not forfeit to the will.
Then away, then away, ere we meet the coming day,
For the dewy haze is rising like a curtain o'er the sea;—
I have winds and waves and star, but they serve us not in war,
And the present bears the flower that's most precious unto me.

SCENE III.

The bark is on the sea, and the breeze is in the sail,
And the star to guide us onward is now gleaming o'er the steep;
We have won the prize we sought, and the whisper of the gale
Would counsel us, the treasure, we have haply won, to keep.
Then away, then away, ere the tyrant seeks his prey,—
There's a murmur of the ocean that's unfriendly to our flight;
And the cricket at mine ear has a chirrup full of fear,
That but lately sung in music of a confident delight.

SCENE IV.
THE CASSIQUE OF ACCABEE;
A LEGEND OF ASHLEY RIVER.
A FEW words, by way of preface, will save us the necessity of burdening with notes the little story which follows. Accabee is the well-known name of a lovely, but neglected, farmstead, in the neighborhood of Charleston, on Ashley River. It was in earlier periods applied to a larger district in the same neighborhood. Keawah is the aboriginal name of the Ashley. The tribe of Accabee was probably of the same family with the Yemassees, the Edistos, and other groups, inhabiting the lower country of South Carolina. The Gaelic Chief spoken of in the text was Lord Cardross, who made a settlement at, or near, Beaufort, which, after a brief existence of four years, was destroyed by an incursion of the Indians and Spaniards.

IT was a night of calm—o'er Ashley's waters
Crept the sweet billows to their own soft tune,
While she, most bright of Keawah's fair daughters,
Whose voice might spell the footsteps of the moon,
As slow we swept along,
Pour'd forth her own sweet song,
A lay of rapture not forgotten soon.


Hush'd was our breathing, stay'd the lifted oar,
Our spirits rapt, our souls no longer free,
While the boat drifting softly to the shore,
Brought us within the shades of Accabee;—
“Ah!” sudden cried the maid,
In the dim light afraid;
“'Tis here the ghost still walks of the old Yemassee.”


And sure the spot was haunted by a power,
To fix the pulses in each youthful heart;
Never was moon more gracious in a bower,
Making delicious fancy work for art;
Weaving, so meekly bright,
Her pictures of delight,
That, though afraid to stay, we sorrow'd to depart.


“If these old groves are haunted”—sudden then,
Said she, our sweet companion—“it must be
By one who loved, and was beloved again,
And joy'd all forms of loveliness to see:—
Here, in these groves they went,
Where love and worship, blent,
Still framed the proper God for each idolatry.


“It could not be that love should here be stern,
Or beauty fail to sway with sov'ran might;
These, from so blesséd scenes, should something learn,
And swell with tenderness and shape delight:
These groves have had their power,
And bliss, in bygone hour,
Hath charm'd, with sigh and song, the passage of the night.”


“It were a bliss to think so;” made reply
Our Hubert—“yet the tale is something old,
That checks us with denial;—and our sky,
And these brown woods that, in its glittering fold,
Look like a fairy clime,
Still unsubdued by time,
Have evermore the tale of wrong'd devotion told.”


“Give us thy legend, Hubert;” cried the maid;—
And, with down-dropping oars, our yielding prow
Shot to a still lagoon, whose ample shade
Droop'd from the gray moss of an old oak's brow:
The groves, meanwhile, lay bright,
Like the broad stream, in light,
Soft, sweet as ever yet the lunar loom display'd.


“Great was the native chief,”—'twas thus began
The legend of our comrade—“who, in sway,
Held the sweet empire which to-night we scan,
Stretching, on either hand, for miles away:
A stalwart chief was he,
Cassique of Accabee,
And lord o'er numerous tribes who did with pride obey.


“War was his passion, till the white man came,
And then his policy;—and well he knew,
How, over all, to plan the desperate game,
And when to rise, and when to sink from view;
To plant his ambush well,
And how, with horrid yell,
To dart, at midnight forth, in fury arm'd with flame.


“His neighbors by the Ashley, the pale race,
Were friends and allies 'gainst all other foes;
They dwelt too nearly to his royal place,
To make the objects of their commerce blows;
But no such scruple staid
His wild and cruel raid,
When, by Heléna's Bay, the Gaelic hamlet rose.


“And moved by Spanish wile that still misled,
Our chieftain, in one dark November night,
With all his warriors, darted from his bed,
And drove the Gaelic chief from his, in flight:—
Scalplocks and other spoils,
Rewarded well his toils,
And captives graced his triumph after fight.


“But, when the strife was wildest, and the fire
Play'd fiercest on the roofs of bough and leaf,
A fair-hair'd child, misdeeming him her sire,
Rush'd headlong to the arms of the red chief:—
'Twas not his hour to spare—
His fingers in her hair,
And tomahawk, lifted high, declared his savage ire.


“But, in the light of her own blazing home,
He caught the entreaty in her soft blue eye,
Which, weeping still the while, would wildly roam,
From him who held, to those who hurried by;—
Strange was the emotion then,
That bade him stay his men,
And, in his muscular arms, lift that young damsel high.


“He bore her through the forest, many a mile,
With a rude tenderness and matchless strength;
She slept upon his arm—she saw his smile,
Seen seldom, and reached Accabee at length;
Here, for a term, he kept
The child, her griefs unwept,
With love, that did from her a seeming love beguile.


“Daughter of ancient Albyn, she was bright,
With a transparent beauty; on her cheek,
The rose and lily, struggling to unite,
Did the best blooms of either flower bespeak;
Whilst floods of silken hair,
Free flowing, did declare
The gold of western heavens when sinks the sun from sight.


“Our chief had reached his thirtieth summer—she
Was but thirteen; yet, till he saw this maid,
Love made no portion of his reverie:
Strife was his passion, and the midnight raid;
The dusky maids, in vain,
Had sought to weave their chain,
About that fierce wild heart that still from all went free.


“But, free no longer, they beheld him bound
By his fair captive; strife was now unsought;
The chase abandon'd; and his warriors found
Their chief no more where fields were to be fought;—
He better loved to brood
In this sweet solitude,
She still in sight, who thus her captor's self had caught.


“She little dream'd her conquest, for he still
Maintain'd her as his child, with tenderness;—
As one who seeks no farther of his will,
Than to protect and with sweet nurture bless;
Such love as sire might show,
Did that dark chief bestow,
When, with a gentle clasp, he met her child-caress.


“She grew to be the blossom of his sight—
For her he snared the fawn,—for her he brought
Gay gauds of foreign fabric;—her delight
Being still the sweetest recompense he sought;—
And, when her feet would rove,
He led her through the grove,
Show'd her its devious paths and all its secrets taught.


“She grew apace in beauty as in years,
And he the more devoted:—until now
His eye beheld her growth and had no fears,—
But soon a shadow rose above his brow;—
That shadow, born of doubt,
Which finds love's secret out,
And, o'er its sunniest bower, still spans an arch of tears.


“This shadow had its birth with our dark chief,
When to his home, one eve, returning late,
He saw, with passion still subdued by grief,
A stranger with his beauty, in his gate;—
One of the pale white race,
Whose presence, in that place,
Brought to his heart a fear that troubled it like fate.


“Yet was he but a pedlar,—he who came,—
Thus troubling waters which had slept before;
He brought his glittering wares, and did but claim
To show them, and night's lodging to implore:
And, o'er his pack, with eyes
Of eager, glad surprise,
Stoop'd our young maid when stept the chief within his door.


“His stealthy footsteps stirr'd no single sound;
They knew not of the eyes upon them set—
She, the gay thoughtless girl, in thought profound,
Deep in such wealth as had not tempted yet;
While his—the stranger's—gaze,
In a most pleasant maze,
Scann'd her bright cheeks, unseen, from eyes of glittering jet.


“A handsome youth, of dark and amorous glance,
Showing a grateful consciousness of power,
Yet thoughtless, in that moment of sweet trance,
How best to woo and win the forest flower;
Even at that moment, stood
The red-man from the wood,
Gazing, with instinct grief, that had its birth that hour.


“Quickly he broke the silence and came forth,
While the fair girl, upstarting from her dream,
Hurried his search into such stores of worth,
As did on eyes of young Aladdin gleam:—
Clipping his neck with arms
That spoke of dearer charms,
The maid Othello loved might she that moment seem.


“And, with a pleased, but still a sinking heart,
He yielded to her pleading: he had stores,—
Such treasures as the red-man might impart,
Of precious value, borne to foreign shores;
Spoils in the forest caught,
By tribute hunter brought,
Soft furs from beaver won by snares of sylvan art.


“Sadly, the indulgent chief—but with a smile,—
Gave up his treasure at his ward's demand;
The precious gauds which did her eyes beguile,
Soon clasp'd her neck, or glitter'd in her hand.
All had she won—but still
There was a feminine will,
That led her glance astray beneath that stranger's wile.


“Their eyes commerced beside the blazing fire,
Hers still unconscious of the erring vein;
The chief beheld, in his, the keen desire,
And his heart swell'd with still increasing pain;
Yet, though the sting was deep,
His passion, made to sleep,
Look'd calm through eyes that seem'd a stranger still to ire.


“His board was spread with hospitable hand,
Crisp'd the brown bread and smoked the venison steak;
An ancient squaw, still ready at command,
Pour'd the casina tea, their thirst to slake;
Then, as the hour grew late,
With calm and lofty state,
The chief himself, with care, the stranger's couch did make.


“At sunrise they partook the morning meal,
And then the white man went upon his way;
Not without feeling—teaching her to feel—
How sweet to both had been his still delay:—
The nature, long at rest,
Rose, pleading, at her breast,
For that pale race from which, perforce, she dwelt astray.


“She long'd for their communion,—for the youth
Had waken'd memories, not to be subdued,
Of that dear home, and friends whose tender ruth
Possess'd her still in that sweet solitude;
And, saddening with the thought,
Her secret soul grew fraught
With hopes, with doubts, with dreams, o'er which she loved to brood.


“The chief beheld the trouble in her eye,
He felt as well the trouble in his heart,
And, ere the morrow's sun was in the sky,
He bade her make her ready to depart;—
He had a wider home,
Where love might safely roam,
Nor fear the stranger's foot, nor tremble at his art.


“Cassique among the Edistos, he bore
His treasure to the river of that name;
He sought the forests on its western shore,
Millions of acres he alone might claim;
Where the great stream divides,
He cross'd its double tides,
Still seeking denser empires to explore.


“At length, he paused beside a little lake,
A clear sweet mirror for the midnight star;
‘Soon, weary one, thy slumbers shalt thou take;
In sooth, to-day, our feet have wander'd far;
Yet look, and thou shalt see,
The wigwam smokes for thee,—
Those fires that gleam through woods show where our people are.


“‘Here shalt thou have fond service—here the clime
Is sweet and healthful;—buskin'd, with thy bow,
Thou'lt wander forth with me, at morning's chime,
And I to snare or slay the game, will show:
Broad are the sheltering woods,
Bright are the streams, the floods,
And safe the realm that hence thy youthful heart shall know.’


“Thus counselling, he led her o'er the plain,
Down the smooth hill, beside the lakelet clear;
They tread the gloomy forest paths again,
Till sudden, the whole landscape opens fair;
‘Look! weary one,’ he cries;
‘Our realm before us lies,
Far spread as bird can fly, or speeds by day the deer.’


“In sooth, to one whose heart is all at rest,
With not a human care to call it thence,
It was a home that rapture might have bless'd,
Lovely to sight and dear to innocence;
Great trees, a welcome shade,
Of beech and poplar made,
Fortress of peace that love might deem his best defence.


“Long groves of pine and cedar led through wastes
Made lovely by wild flowers of every hue;
Through arching boughs and vines the river hastes,
Still with the song of birds that wander too;
A fresh green realm, unbroke
By plough, or woodman's stroke,
Rich in savannahs green, and lakes of skyey blue.


“His was the realm, and at his bidding came
The tribes that peopled it; beneath his sway
They framed their rude society;—his blame,
Or praise, sufficient guide to shape their way;
Still, with the falling leaf,
The signal of our chief
Prepared them for the chase and counsell'd their array.


“And thus, for many a moon, within that shade,
Dwelling 'mongst vassals rude but loyal still,
Remote, but not in loneliness, our maid
Had all that love could sigh for, but its will;
Submissive still she found
The gentle tribes around,
The squaws received her law, the warriors too obey'd.


“No censure check'd her walks—no evil eyes
Darken'd upon her childish sports at eve;
If o'er the chieftain's brow a trouble lies,
'Tis sure no fault of hers that makes him grieve;
For her he still hath smiles,
And, in her playful wiles,
He finds a charm that still must artlessly deceive.


“Her wild song cheers him at the twilight hour,
As, on the sward, beside her sylvan cot,
He throws him down, meet image of a power
Subdued by beauty to the vassal's lot;
With half unconscious gaze,
His eye her form surveys,
And fancies fill his heart which utterance yet have not.


“She had expanded into womanhood
In those brief years of mild captivity,
And now, as 'neath his glance the damsel stood,
Nothing more sweet had ever met his eye;—
Fair, with her Saxon face,
Her form a forest grace
Had won from woodland sports of rare agility.


“Her rich blue eyes, her streaming yellow hair,
The soft white skin that show'd the crimson tide,
And perfect features—made her beauties rare,
That well the charms of Indian race defied;—
Her motion, as of flight,
Tutor'd by wild delight,
Brought to her form a grace at once of love and pride.


“And, as he gazed, with rapture ill suppress'd,
Inly the chief resolved that she should be
The woman he would take unto his breast,
Ere the next moon should ride up from the sea;
His child no more,—he felt
His soul within him melt,
To hear her voice in song, her thought in fancy free.


“She felt at last her power upon his heart,
As she beheld the language in his eye;
And, with this knowledge, came a natural art,
Which bade her glances unto his reply;
Made happy by her look
His soul new poison took,
her to his breast, nor seem'd she to deny.


“‘I shall go hence,’ quoth he, ‘the Hunter's Moon—
These sticks shall tell thee of the broken days;
When all are gone, I shall return,—and soon
The beauties that I hold within my gaze,
Shall bless, if thou approve,
This heart, and the fond love
That knows thee as the star the ocean stream that sways.’


“And she was silent while he spake—her head
Sunk, not in sadness, and upon his breast;
Fondly he kiss'd her—other words he said,
And still, in dear embrace, her form caress'd;
Then parting, sped afar,
Led by the Hunter's Star,
Where the bear wallows in his summer nest.


“She had no sorrow to obey the will
That ruled a nation: true, he slew her sire,
But he had been a gentle guardian still,
Baffling each danger, soothing each desire;
The power that he possess'd
Was grateful to her breast,
And warm'd with pride the heart, that lack'd each holier fire.


“That night there rose an image in her dreams,
Of the young trader seen at Accabee;
His fair soft face upon her memory gleams,
His keen, dark, searching eye, still wantonly
Pursues her with its blaze;
And she returns the gaze,
And thus her heart communes with one she cannot see.


“It was as if the chief, by the same word
That told his own fond purpose, had compell'd
The image of the person she preferr'd,—
And, seeing him in dreams, her soul was spell'd
With fancies that, in vain,
She strove to hush again—
She saw their shapes by day, by night their voices heard.


“Saddened by this communion, she withdrew
From those who sought her; in deep forests went,
By lonely streams and shades, from human view,
Nursing a vague and vexing discontent;—
For the first time, a care
Hung on her heart like fear—
The shadows from a soul not wholly innocent.


“There is a fate beside us day and night,
Obedient to the voice within our hearts;
Boldly we summon, and it stands in sight;
We speak not, and in silence it departs;—
'Twas thus with her, as still
She roved with aimless will,
Beside the swamps through which the Edisto still darts.


“She spoke aloud, or did not speak, his name,
Whose image was the sole one in her breast;
But, suddenly, from out the woods he came,
And mutual glances mutual joy express'd:—
‘Ah! sought so long before,
I fear'd that, never more,
Mine eyes should see the form that kept my soul from rest.


“‘How have I search'd for you in devious path,
Forgetful of the mercenary trade!
And now, though perill'd by the redman's wrath,
I seek you in forbidden forest shade;
For never, since that night,
When first you met my sight,
Hath beauty on my heart such sweet impression made.’


“They sat beneath the shade of silent trees,
Close guarded by a thicket dense and deep;
There, onward, stole the river at its ease,
And, through the air, the birds made easy sweep;—
Those bowers were sweetly dight
For safety and delight;—
The stranger won the prize the chieftain still would keep.


“He came, the dark-brow'd chieftain, from the chase,
Laden with precious spoils of forest pride;
His heart exulting as he near'd the place
Where the fair Saxon waited as his bride:
But who shall speak the grief
That shook that warrior chief,
When they declared her flight with yester-eventide.


“He had no voice for anguish or regret;—
He spake not of his purpose—but went forth,
With a keen spirit, on one progress set,
Now on the southern stream side, now the north;
Following, with sleuthhound's scent,
The way the lovers went,
Tracking each footfall sure, in leaf, in grass, and earth.


“Nor did he track in vain! They little knew
The unerring instinct of that hunter race;
A devious progress did the twain pursue,
Through streams and woods, to baffle still the trace;
But how should they beguile
The master of each wile,
Each art pursued in war or needful in the chase?


“In fancy safe, and weary now with flight,
The lovers lay at noonday in the shade;
Soft through the leaves and grateful to the sight,
The sun in droplets o'er the valley play'd;
But two short leagues, and they
Should leave the perilous way,
On Keawah secure, in home by squatter made.


“Thus satisfied, with seeming certainty,
Won by the hour's sweet stillness, did the pair,
Shelter'd beneath the brows of an old tree,
Give freedom to the love they joy'd to share;
His arm about her press'd,
She lay upon his breast,
Life's self forgot in bliss that left no room for care.


“They little dream'd that, lurking in the wood,
A witness to the freedom of their bliss,
The fiery chieftain they had baffled stood,
Fierce, with envenom'd fang and fatal hiss;
The lord of death and life,
He grasp'd the deadly knife,
And shook the tomahawk high but rarely known to miss.


“But, ere he sped the weapon to its mark,
His heart grew gentle 'neath a milder sway;
True, they had left his dwelling lone and dark,
But should he make it glad were he to slay?
Nor, if the man he slew,
Could he again renew
The trust he gave the maid as in his happier day.


“Nor could he strike, with stern and fatal blow,
Her whose fair beauties were too precious still;
A noble purpose came to soothe his woe,
And crown, with best revenge, a generous will;—
Forth strode he from the wood,
And ere they knew, he stood,
With weapon bared, and look still resolute to kill.


“As one who at the serpent's rattle starts,
Sharp, sudden sounded in the covert nigh,
They heard his voice, and both their guilty hearts
Sunk, hopeless, 'neath the expected penalty;
But, stifling his deep grief,
With few stern words, the chief,
Declared, though worthy death, the guilty should not die!


“O'erjoy'd at respite scarcely yet believed,
The girl had risen and rush'd to clasp his knees,
But he whose faith had been so much deceived,
No homage now could pacify or please;
Calm, but with gloomy face,
He checks the false embrace,
And still, the crouching youth, with scornful eye, he sees.


“He bade them rise and follow where he led,
Himself conducted to the dwelling near;
Here, till the dawn, each found a separate bed;
With morning o'er the Keawah they steer;
Still guided he the way,
And, ere the close of day,
Once more the three to shades of Accabee repair.


“‘Here,’ said he, ‘is your future dwelling-place,
This be, my gift, your heritage of right;
The holy man, of your own foreign race,
Shall, with the coming day, your hands unite;
And men of law shall know
That I these lands forego,
For her who still hath been the apple of my sight.


“‘See that you cherish her with proper faith;—
If that you wrong her, look for wrong from me:
Once have I spared you, when the doom was death;
Beware the future wrath you may not flee;
Mine eye shall watch for hers,
And if a breath but stirs
Her hair too rudely,—look for storms on Accabee.’


“He did as he had promised; they were wed
By Christian rites,—and legal deeds convey'd
The heritage;—without a word then sped
The chief into his forests, seeking shade:
Months pass'd—a year went by,
And none beheld his eye,
Where still his thought, with love, through these sweet places stray'd.


“He grew to be forgotten by the twain;
Or if not wholly by the woman, she
Ne'er spoke of him,—ne'er look'd for him again,
Though much it might have gladden'd her to see;
For love had lost its flower,
And soon there came an hour,
When all her young heart's pleasure grew to pain!


“The first sweet flush of summer dalliance gone,
The first most precious bloom of passion o'er,
Indifference follow'd in the heart that won,
And scorn found place where rapture woke no more;
No kindly nurture bless'd
With love her lonely breast,
And soon even peace had fled the home so glad before.


“And scorn grew into hate, and hate to wrath,
And wrath found speech in violence;—his arm
Smote the unhappy woman from his path;—
Submission could not soothe, nor tears disarm,
The cruel mood, the will,
True to past passions still,
Which Love and Beauty now, no more sufficed to charm.


“The profligate husband, reckless of her woe,
Her meek submission and her misery,
Prepared, in secret, still another blow,
And bargain'd for the sale of Accabee;
Already had he drawn
The fatal deed—had gone,
Resolved, in other lands, remote, his wife to flee.


“He little knew that eyes were on his flight,
That long had mark'd his deeds;—his way led through
The umbrageous groves of Eutaw:—long ere night
His footsteps to the white man's clearings drew;—
Exulting in the dream,
Successful, of his scheme,
He hails the cottage-smokes of him who bought, in sight.


“But now a voice arrests him as he goes—
Forth starts the red chief from the covering wood;
At once he knew him for the worst of foes;
Guilt quell'd his courage, terror froze his blood;
The horse is stay'd—in vain,
He jerks the extended rein,
Vainly applies the spur, and showers his flanks with blows.


“Stern was the summons—in a single word—
‘Down!’—and he yielded to the vigorous hand;
‘I gave thee all!’ were then the accents heard—
The woman from my bosom, and my land;—
I warn'd thee, ere I went,
Of wrath and punishment,
If hair upon her head, in wrath was ever stirr'd.


“‘I know thee, and thy deeds; and thou shalt die!’
‘Mercy!’ implored the profligate in vain.
Vainly he struggles—vainly seeks to fly—
Even as he strives, the hatchet cleaves his brain.
Quivering, he lies beneath,
While, from his leathern sheath,
The warrior draws his knife, and coldly scalps the slain.


“Another night, and on the Accabee,
Softly the moon was smiling through its grove;
Yet sad the woman hail'd its light, for she
No longer warm'd with hope, or glow'd with love:
Grief, and a wan despair,
Reign'd in her soul of care,
Whence love, expell'd by wrath, had long been forced to flee.


“She crouch'd beside the hearth in vacant mood,
Silence and woe close crouch'd on either hand,—
Life's hope all baffled,—all the innocent brood
Of joys, that once had crowded at command,
Dead—gone like summer flowers;
Desolate all her hours,
Her life was now one dread, one deathlike solitude.


“With dreary gaze she watch'd the flickering fire,
Nor mark'd around the thickening growth of gloom;
She sees, unheeding, the bright flame expire,
Nor marks the fearful aspect in her room;
Beside her rest the brands—
'Tis but to stretch her hands:
Alas! her desolate soul for light hath no desire.


“But lo! another form, beside her own,
Bends to the task;—sudden, the resinous pine
Flames up;—she feels she is no more alone;
She sees a well-known eye upon her shine,
And hides her face, and cries—
‘The Chief!’ His silent eyes
Still saddening o'er the shape too long and dearly known.


“‘The man whom thou didst wed, will never more
Lay angry hand upon thee—he had sold
Thy land, and fled thee for another shore;
But that I wound him in the serpent's fold,
And took from him the power
That had usurp'd thy dower;
In proof of what I tell thee,—lo! behold!’


“Thus speaking, he, beside her, on the floor,
Cast down the white man's written instrument;
Sign'd, seal'd, and witness'd; framed with legal lore;
Conveying—such the document's intent—
All these fair groves and plains,
The Accabee domains,
To one, of kindred race, whose name the paper bore.


“And she had sign'd it, with unwilling hand,
Ignorant of its meaning, but in dread;
Obedient to her tyrant's fierce command,
While his arm shook in threat'ning o'er her head;
'Twas in that very hour,
His blow, with brutal power,
Had stricken her to the earth, where long she lay as dead.


“He little dream'd that the avenger near,
Beheld him, and prepared his punishment;
You ask, Why came he not to interfere,
And stay, ere yet was wrought the foul intent;
Enough, the red man knows
His time to interpose:—
Sternly his hour he takes, with resolute will unbent.


“Unerring, we have seen him in pursuit—
Unsparing, we have seen him in his blow;—
His mission was not ended; and, though mute,
He stood surveying her, who, cowering low,
Crept humbly to his feet,
As seeming to entreat,—
He had another task, which found the warrior slow.


“But he was firm:—‘This paper is your own,—
Another proof is mine, that you will be
Safe from the blows of him so lately known;
He hath his separate lands henceforth from me;
Ample the soil I gave,
Beside the Eutaw's wave;
In token of my truth—this bloody scalplock see.’


“Then shriek'd the unhappy woman with affright,
Revolting at the trophy, dripping yet,
That, down upon the paper, in her sight,
With quiet hand, the haughty chieftain set;
‘Spare me! Oh, spare!’ she cries:
And crouching, with shut eyes,
Backward she crept, as if she safety sought in flight.


“‘Fear nothing!’ said the chieftain; ‘'twas for thee,
I brought this bloody token of my truth,
To show thee, from this moment, thou art free
To the possession of thy life and youth;
Still hast thou beauty; still
Thy heritage—thy will;
Go, seek thy kindred pale, secure of love and ruth.


“‘From him, who, in thy thoughtlessness of heart,
Thou mad'st a master over thee, I save;
I slew thy father—I have done his part,
And give thee wealth more ample than he gave;
Henceforth, thou wilt not see
The Chief at Accabee;
Beware again lest passion make thee slave.


“‘I leave thee now forever!’ ‘No!’ she cried:
‘Oh! take me to thy people;—let me dwell
Lone, peaceful, on the Edisto's green side,
Which, had I left not, I had still been well:—
Forgive me, that the child,
With heart both weak and wild,
Err'd, in not loving, where she might have loved with pride!’


“‘I had believed thee once; but now, too late!
Henceforth I know thee, only to forget.’
‘Thou canst not!’—‘It may be, that thus my fate
Hath spoken; but my resolute will is set,
In manhood,—and I know,
Though all of life be woe,
Thus better—than with faithlessness to make.’


“She crouch'd beneath his feet, incapable
Of answer to that speech; and his sad look,
As if his eyes acknowledged still a spell,
One long, deep survey of the woman took;—
She still unseeing aught,
Of that sad, searching thought,
Which, speaking through his eye, her soul could never brook.


Sudden as spectre, waving wide his hand,
He parted from her presence:—He was gone,
Into the shadows of that forest land;
And, desolate now, the woman lay alone,—
Crouching beside the hearth,
While thousand fears had birth,
Haunting her thought with griefs more fearful than the known.


“Our story here is ended. Of her fate
Nothing remains to us, but that she sold,
Of Accabee, the beautiful estate,
And sought her shelter in the city's fold;
The purchaser, meanwhile,
Made the dark forest smile,
And crown'd its walks with works most lovely to behold.


“A noble dwelling rose amidst the trees,
Fair statues crown'd the vistas—pathways broke
The umbrageous shadows,—and sweet melodies,
Among the groves, at noon and morning woke;—
And great reserves of game,
In which the wild grew tame—
And pleasant lakes, by art, were scoop'd for fisheries.


“Here pleasure strove to make her own abode;
She left no mood uncherish'd which might cheer;
Through the grim forests she threw wide the road,
And welcomed Beauty, while expelling care:
Wealth spared no toils to bless,
And still, with due caress,
Honor'd the daily groups that sought for pastime there.


“But still the spot was haunted by a grief;—
Joy ever sank in sadness:—guests depart;
A something sorrowful, beyond belief,
Impairs the charms of music and of art;
Till sadly went each grace,
And, as you see the place,
Gradual the ruin grew, a grief to eye and heart.


“The native genius, born in solitude,
Is still a thing of sorrow; and his spell,
Whatever be the graft of foreign mood,
Maintains its ancient, sorrowful, aspect well;—
Still reigns its gloomy lord,
With all his sway restored,
Lone, o'er his barren sceptre doom'd to brood.”


Slow sped our skiff into the open light,—
The billows bright before us,—but no more
Rose love's sweet ditty on our ears that night;—
Silent the maid look'd back upon the shore,
And thought of those dark groves,
And that wild chieftain's loves,
As they had been a truth her heart had felt of yore.

ALBERT AND ROSALIE

I.
SHE sat beside the lattice and look'd forth
Upon the waters. A smooth stream went by,
Playfully murmuring, and along its banks
Making a pleasant music. 'Twas the hour,
When, shooting through the light wave, his canoe
Bore him that loved her; when, in other days,
Her own love, deeply hallow'd by its truth,
Was sanctified by hope and trust in heaven—
In heaven and him! It was the hour, and there,
The waters lay in light—the silvery light
Of the May moon, that gliding through the trees,
Pour'd down her rich smile on them. A sweet breeze
Came from the opposite shore, and would have borne
The birdlike streamer of his little bark,
And made her sail swell out, as if it knew
And felt the love-assignéd office. 'Twas the hour,
But still he came not. A sad servitor
That ever watch'd her heart, and had a look
Of frowning sorrow, and was named Despair,
Rebuked her eyes that look'd for him in vain,
And bade her hope not. Wherefore look'd she then,
Thus ever, and still earnestly with hope,
That seem'd but a sweet sorrow? Who shall tell
If thought was in that fondness?—if the mind
Went with the unconscious eye; and, in that glance
Of sad abstraction, if the expression strong,
Had reason for its guide? It was, alas!
But the sad habit of her form that now
Kept her a watcher. Her fond eyes look'd forth,
Unmonitor'd by mind, from memory!—
She saw not the bright waters—not the moon—
Not the fair prospect!—All was vacancy,
To that unheeding mourner! She had gazed
Till all grew dark before her!—She had thought,
Till thought had swoll'n to madness!—She had felt,
Till feeling, like some fever, ate away
The heart it fed on.


II.
'Twas a cruel tale,
Told by the villagers, of an early love,
And childish indiscretion:—such a tale,
As erring but fond natures, aptly leave
In every valley where warm spirits dwell,
And sunny maidens. Rosalie was young—
Lovely as young. A childish excellence,
Infantile grace, with archness intermix'd,
Play'd in her look, and sparkled in her eye,
Which glow'd with ravishing fires, from a dark orb,
That had a depth like heaven! A cheek, fair
And delicate as a rose-leaf newly blown;—
A brow like marble—lofty and profuse,
With the rich brown of her o'ergathering hair!—
These were her beauties—nor through these, alone,
Was she held worthy to be sought of love
In frequent worship. The rich, rosy lips,
That play'd and parted ever with a smile,
Becoming, with mix'd dignity and love,—
Had music there a dweller. Many a night,
Her wild song, o'er those waters, silenced them,
And their rough murmurs, to the spell-bound ears
Of her enamor'd hearers. She would sing,
As if song were an element, and she,
The gay, glad bird, just fitted to extend
Her bright wings o'er its bosom and go forth,—
Bringing rich notes to earth from the high heaven,
To which sweet echoes ever bore them back!
And in her rustic home, and, with the crowd
That came about her ever, 'twas a sway,
Queen-like and undisputed, which she bore,
And which they gave her;—nor, in this abused;—
The power she wielded had its spells in love,
And gentleness, and true thought—never in scorn,
Or any wayward impulse or caprice,
Solicitous to humble or deny:—
The queen of loveliness, she was no less
The queen of modesty and maiden grace,
Unchallenged in each subject's heart, and there,
Having a home or palace, at her will.


III.
What wonder, then, if many lovers came
To woo that maiden? Never maiden yet
Had sway like hers in the secluded vale,
Where stood her dwelling. From afar and near
Came the tall rustics in their Sunday garb
To see and seek her. From the distant hills,
Where fame and fond report had made her known,
They came on mix'd pretences. Having seen,
Their feet grew fasten'd, and their amorous hearts
Dissolved away to weakness, while they bow'd,
And spoke their several loves,—but spoke in vain.
Not proud, nor coy, the maiden yet was choice,
And sought a kindred spirit for her own,
When she should give her heart,—and him she found—
So thought she fondly—for the youth was fair—
A gentle youth, to whom a better sphere,
And an occasional travel in far lands,
Had taught the polish of the citizen,
Subduing the rude manners, and bestowing
The grace of social life—the symmetry
Of movement and expression, while it takes
The sharp, rough edge from language, and refines,
To unobtrusive sweetness, the discourse,
That soothes the ear it never should assail.
He had departed from his native home,
Leaving his father's hills in early youth,
When Rosalie—herself a native there—
Was yet a child. Returning, she was then
A child no longer. With the rest he saw,
And, with a better fortune than the rest,
He sought her out and wooed her. 'Tis a tale—
A chronicle of sorrow, not of shame,
Sacred in memory, in the heart secure,
And sweetly dear, though sad!


IV.
We linger now,—
We would not hasten in our narrative,
To its sad close. But on their early loves,—
The hours when they were happy—with no thought
To promise the thick sorrow that o'ercame
And tore their hearts asunder—let us pause.
She loved but him of all the valley round,
She saw but him of all the suitors there,
She heard but his discourse, knew but his form,
And had no thought, no feeling for the rest!
The sunset hour still brought him o'er the lake,—
The sunset hour still found her watching there,
Where now we see her. From the opposite shore,
Her eye could note his little, light canoe,
When first emerging from the reedy banks,
It broke the quiet waters into smiles.
She saw him trim his sail, and every change
Of movement she discerned; and, through her heart,
Seeing, as through a glass, where every hope
Had lent some light, and every love gave power,
She thought the very smile upon his lips
Grew visible to her gaze. Thus, day by day,
For months, in a sweet silence of discourse,
They moved and met each other with their hearts,
Having no other speech. But the time came,—
Too soon, perchance, though slow to youthful hope,—
When love should shape his language. 'Twas an hour,
In early spring—Love's season and the flowers',
Season of budding eyes, and blessing hearts!—
Nature was in her sweet virginity,
When they walk'd forth i' the garden. Lovely buds,
Clustering in leafy cells, gave promise meet
Of untold fruitage—brightly the sun shone,
Yet inoppressive, for his slanting rays
Came broken through the forest. All around,
Young flower and humming insect, bird and breeze,
Partaking of youth's happiest harmonies,
Murmur'd in gladness to the delicate sense
That flowed in its fresh feelings. Rosalie
Hung on her lover's arm, yet undeclared
His passion for her. The young maiden's heart
Gush'd with its sweet o'erfulness, while the tear
Of an unstudied joy upon her cheek,
Trembled in light, and then exhaled away
In odor,—till he grew a worshipper,
Yet had no words, save in his eloquent eyes,
Which spoke that language of sublimer love,
Too pure for common syllables, too like
The high devotion of an innocent heart,
Looking through gentle fears, and blessing hopes,
As to its God! Together they walk'd on,
Till the groves thicken'd, and the silent trees,
Closed round them like a dwelling; with no eye
To peer into that holy home of love,
Scaring its trembling, tried inhabitants!
He spoke—he spoke at last! He spoke of love,
And the breeze echoed him, and murmur'd “love;”
And every flower and leaf had a sweet name,
Love-written, upon them; and a print of hearts,
United, grew, like flower and leaf together,—
And Rosalie and Albert, thence, were one!


V.
Silent before so long, their prison'd souls
Then gush'd in mutual language, and pour'd forth,
In homage to each other, the fond thoughts,
The dreams by night, the fancies through the day,
Which had possess'd and purified them long.
Their thoughts were so much music, and they spoke,
In sweetest measures;—even as the bird just 'scaped
From the close caging of some gentle dame,
Showing its freedom's consciousness in song
Not less than flight. Love was their monitor—
Love their companion—Love their pleasant charge.
In Rosalie it spoke in gentlest sighs,
A broken language,—in a start of song,
Capricious, wild, that suddenly came forth,
Even as the playful robin from the brake,
As suddenly retiring into shade,
And trembling at his own audacity.
She was a sweet dependant, and her arm
On Albert's, hung so fondly—and her head
Droop'd with her joy, like some dew-laden flower
Upon his bosom; and he loved the more
For such dependence. Noble and erect,
He clasp'd her to his heart, and his eye gleam'd
With pride and pleasure while surveying hers.
His sweet, melodious voice, deep, organ-like,
Went to her heart at every utter'd word,
Making his love a power, whose sway, secure,
And conscious of its own security,
Forbore to wrong, and with exaction sweet,
Solicited the boon, as 't were a boon,
When, in her heart, the spelling passion there
Proclaim'd it his own right. He was a man
Among the thousand! Unassuming, he
Might yet assume, unquestion'd. Gentleness,
And a strange strength—a calm, o'erruling strength,
Were mix'd within him so, that neither took
Possession from the other—neither rose
In mastery or in passion; but still grew
Harmoniously together.—In his strength,
The mighty oak had likeness—while gentleness,
Wound round him like the rosy parasite,
The flush spring gives it, wreathing its great might
With sweetest color, and adorning grace.
His soul, refined beyond the rustic world,
Had yet no city vices. He had kept,
Its whiteness unprofaned, and he could lift
His heart to heaven in faith—his eye on man,
Having no fear—his hope to Rosalie,
As to an object of abiding love,
Without one taint of base or sinful thought.


VI.
True joy, still born of heaven, is bless'd with wings,
And, tired of earth, it plumes them back again,
And so we lose it. A sad change came o'er
The fortunes of that pair, whose loves have been
Our theme of story:—a sad change, that oft
Comes o'er love's fortunes in all lands and homes,
Nor spares the humblest. Rosalie was young
In fancy, as in years. Truly she loved,
And yet not wisely. Had her heart replied
To any question of its love for him,
To whom she pledged it, she had warmly spoke
For its devotion; but her fancy, quick,
Roving, and playful, was not yet subdued
To that sweet-tempered, fond exclusiveness,
Which shuts out every object from the thought,
Save of that one to whom all thought is given.
The early train of her admirers gone—
The crowd that flatter'd her with looks and words,
That gave her homage, and pronounced her praise,
In sweet eulogium, vanish'd,—she grew sad.
The praises of her lover were in looks,
And constant, sweet devotion—seldom in words:—
And sometimes, too, he spoke her chidingly,
Though still in truest love. He spoke to her
As one who lived forever in his thought,
A part of him and it—the dearest part;
But yet he spoke her truly,—with no burst
Of fraudulent praise, that runs away with truth,
And gives habitual error place for sway,
In the deluded bosom. Calm, serene,—
His thoughts were clear and honest; and his words,
Still chosen most gently, were not yet disguised
To please the ear of tingling vanity.
Though loving him beyond all other men,
She would have had him, like the rest that came,
A flattering wooer. His substantial worth,
She valued truly; but, not yet content,
She deem'd it might be mingled with those sweets,—
False sweets that lead to sadness!—which were dear
To youthful fancy and a thoughtless heart;—
And, in the wantonness of her sportive moods,
Still craving this frail incense, she would turn
Capriciously away, when most he sought
Her ear and presence; and, in gayest crowds,
Lose the dear hour so rich in love's esteem,
And barter truest pleasures and noblest thoughts,—
Trifling with feelings which should be secure
As they are sacred,—for the idlest game
That ever butterfly pursued in May.


VII.
Yet did he not reproach her. At the first
He gently pray'd that she might live for him,
And know and love him better. Much he strove
To teach her, that, thus bound for life together,
Her study, like his own, should be to make
Her heart familiar with its offices—
Those offices of sweet domestic love,
Which cannot dream of gay society,
And the insidious flattery of the crowd
Having no fireside duties. Fondly still,
With indirect speech, he told his wishes o'er,
And whisper'd counsels such as love might hear,
And none but love could utter. But her ear
Turn'd from him, with a playful, sad caprice,
And she would leave him,—or, in mood more wild,
Reply in tones impatient,—till at last
The youth grew into sadness, as he fear'd,
When they were wedded, that her love might change
Even into hatred, as he could not bring
His nature to a level with the herd
Whose flatteries so misled her. He grew sad,
And yet he sought her; still entreating her
With his own love, which was all earnestness,
Not to make forfeit of the better faith,
The substance for the shade, and sacrifice,
For the capricious freedom of the hour,
The holy, hopeful, best security,
That grows in heart of confidence alone.
Oh! very earnest was he in these prayers;
His soul, the very safety of his being,
Were treasured in that passion! Few his friends,—
An orphan without kindred;—slight the ties
That bound him to all others. None of strength
Did he acknowledge, save the one with her;
And that was his whole life. Wonder not, then,
He trembled at her sad infirmity:—
The loss of Rosalie was loss of all.


VIII.
One night there was a bridal in the vale,
A rustic bridal. Mirth and pleasant cheer,
Sweet music and gay lights, laughter and glee,
Assembled young and old. All that could make
A dear occasion dearer, mingled then,
And the vale rang with joy. Our lovers came,
And revell'd with the rest. Never before
Had Rosalie look'd lovelier. 'Mid the crowd,
She was beheld of all the crowd alone—
She was the bright star to which every eye
Seemed turn'd as in devotion—the gay light
Of every fancy—the fair queen who sway'd
O'er every heart, even then, as in the time
When all were wooers, and no heart, preferr'd,
Had bound her to itself. In her sweet song,
They gather'd round, and had fond memories
Of hours when hope was theirs. They praised her strains
And watch'd the eloquent pleasure in her eye
That said their praise was sweet. From song to song
They led her with beguiling flatteries,
And when the dance began, they crowded round,
Contending for her hand.
There was one dance,
Brought from a foreign land—a winning dance,
Whose sweet voluptuous twinings witch the heart
Into a sad forgetfulness, and arouse
Strange fevers and wild fancies in the blood.
'Twas from a land where vice, in many a form,
Had sapped society, and torn away
The pillars of religion; where the name
Of wife is but another name for all
Of shame and prostitution; where the pride
Of virtue is unknown; where character
Is but a thing of barter and stale use,
And fashion makes a crime necessity.


IX.
“You will not mingle, dearest Rosalie,
Among these waltzers?” It was thus he spoke,
As he beheld the suitors for her hand
Crowding around, impatient to enwrap
Her form in the impassion'd, free caress
Of that voluptuous motion.
“And why not?”.
Straightway she answer'd.
“Was it not your thought,
No less than mine, dear Rosalie, that this dance
Better belong'd to races like th' Italian,
Than a frank, earnest people such as ours,
In whom simplicity, the soul of virtue,
Forbids the goad of passion, lest we drive
The blood to fearful phrensies! Didst thou not
Join with me in the thought, that the pure heart
Must shrink from the embrace with stranger forms;—
Embrace so free as this—as if each touch
Took something from its purity;—for virtue
Is like the down upon the peach;—the flush
Of beauty on the flower;—the golden lustre
That flecks with delicate variety
The slight wing of the butterfly;—one touch
Being fatal to the excellence, whose glory
Lives in its very unapproachableness.
The barriers of opinion in a people,
Belong to their necessity and nature—
Subject them to the abuse of foreign custom,
And we make forfeit all security.
Custom makes barriers still for chastity,—
O'erthrow these barriers, idle though they seem,
And Passion saps the citadel.—Dear Rosalie,
Thou wilt not join these waltzers?”
“But I will!”
Thus the capricious damsel, to the youth,
Who earnestly besought her, still replied—
As, turning from him, she bestow'd her hand
On one who seized it with triumphant joy,
Having the victory—for he had urged
The cause of that fond movement; and, to her,
The pledged wife of another, had discuss'd
The question of that nice propriety,
Which woman must not argue, and yet feel!
“But I will dance it, Albert, as I please,
Or not, if so it please me. And why not?—
I am not yet a bond-woman methinks,
And such constraint as this, would best beseem
A petty household tyranny,—the rule
Of modern Blue Beard, than the free regard
Of one who seeks for sympathies, not slaves.”
And, with these words, she join'd the whirling group,
While Albert turn'd away and left the hall.


X.
Next morning came a letter to the maid,
And this its language:
“Dearest Rosalie,—
Still dear, though, from this moment, I resign
All claim to call thee so exclusively—
I leave thee. When this scrawl thou read'st, my feet
Shall be beyond these mountains—other climes
Will soon receive me, and on distant waves,
The foreign bark shall bear me,—still from thee.
Farewell—farewell.
“Oh, it had been my thought,
That, from the moment thou didst give thyself
To my fond pleadings, I should cease to be
What I am now—a weary wanderer!
“That hope is gone forever. Thou hast said
The words which have unlink'd our mutual hearts,
They being no longer kindred. Thou hast broken
The flowery twines of love, in thoughtlessness—
Ah! may it be a sorrow but to one!
“And I must bear that sorrow. Thou to me,
Wast all—art all! I may not hope again,
To find thee in another—and I dare not
Seek for another in thee. Those cruel words—
Why didst thou speak them!—they have doom'd us both
To isolation;—me, to the worse doom,
Of hopelessness. 'Tis nothing now I live for—
Yet never heart could love thee, as did mine.
And still I love thee—love thee recklessly,
As loving thee in vain. Henceforth, I live,
As one denied. I cannot love another—
I would not pray such freedom. I have not
The elastic temper of the froward boy,
To change capricious with the monthly moon,
Nor share the blight with each sweet star that sets.
My mind is too subdued—my character,
Too fix'd—too firm! I must be resolute
In love, as in all other qualities,—
Having no changing moods—earnest in all,
Unvarying as the needle, and as true,
Though the storms howl. Such is my nature now.
Vicissitude has tried me—poverty
Counsell'd, and taught me due stability—
Affliction chasten'd; travel, here and there,
'Mong strangers in far wilds and realms unknown,
Taught me their several sorrows, and prepared me,
To better love the quiet walks of home!
“I have no home. It had been in thy heart,
But thou denied'st it lodgment—better pleased
To make a tenant there of idlest moods,
Enjoyments light and worthless, when in mine,
Thou hadst a temple—pure, inviolate,
Sacred to love—and strong—sacred to thee!—
Would thine had been to me but thus devote,
I then had been a hermit. In its cells,
My thoughts and feelings had been saintly forms,
Filling each several niche. Morning and night,
Had found me there a doting worshipper,
And I had hung it round with sweetest store,
The dearest flowers of love—the purest sweets
That follow young enjoyment, and that make,
For twin hearts, of the gloomy caves of earth,
A happy home like heaven.
“Thou hast decreed,
And all these dreams are vanish'd. I would be
Thy tyrant, Rosalie!—ah, happy she
Who loves the gentle tyranny of truth.
Thou wouldst not be a bond-woman!—dear to me,
The sweet bond-service I had pledged to thee.
Thou'dst do or not, as so it pleasured thee—
Ah, me! how different from thy thought was mine!
To do thee pleasure—ay, at mine own pain,—
Was sure to be my sweetest pleasure still;—
And to make slaves of my best sympathies,—
Slaves in thy service,—seem'd to my poor heart,
Their happiest office.
“We have differ'd much—
Too much for love! If these be thoughts of mine,
And thou dost scorn them, having thoughts unlike,—
We are not fit for each other! We must part—
And it is wisdom! When I gave my love,
And pledged my best affections unto thee—
I pledged thee what, next to thy sacred love,
I valued more than all the world beside.
Thou hast not so esteem'd my offering—
Thou hast not so esteem'd my principles,
Nor yet maintain'd thine own, as that we should
Keep bound with true respect, and mutual pride:—
'Tis well we part.
“Yet think not, Rosalie—
The wayward, sad caprice of the last night,
Sole cause of my resolve. I might have sigh'd
And sorrow'd o'er that error, yet forgiven:—
The sin lies deeper. When thou show'st another,
That difference grows betwixt thy heart and mine,
Thou dost invite a foreign arbitration—
Thou makest our secret thought a public thing,
And to the prying eye, and busy tongue
Of peevish envy, and a tattling scorn,
Thou dost unveil the sacred, vestal fire,
Which the mysterious love design'd for us—
For those who love alone!
“If, in my heart,
Or in my deed, or language, I had done
A wrong to thee or thine—where shouldst thou seek
Arbitrament?—where carry up thy cause,
In fond appeal?—where clamor for redress?—
Where, but in my heart!—in our secret shade,
In sacred moments, when, to love devote,
We met in mutual fondness! There, hadst thou come,
And said, as late in public thou didst say,
‘Thou art my tyrant—thou wouldst 'slave me quite,
Make me thy bond-woman, and of sympathies
Generous and freely given, make wretched slaves!’—
Ah, Rosalie! hadst thou but thought of this,
I had not now—but let it pass—no more,—
It is all idle now!
“Once more, farewell!
Be happy, and forget me, Rosalie;—
And shouldst thou love another, let my words
Sink in thy memory, so that thou shalt say
Nothing in rashness—so that ye may keep
The troth between ye as a sacred thing,
Beyond the gaze of the herd, beyond its speech,
Beyond its judgment!—value it beyond
The moment-pleasure always, till thy heart,
Shall grow into a kindred life and thought,
With him to whom thou giv'st it.
“And I pray,—
'Twill be no wrong to him, dear Rosalie—
That, in thy happier moments, when with him,
Thou joy'st in life's most dear realities,—
The pleasant fireside, the cheerful friend,
The gladsome child, and the indulgent lord,—
Thou wilt bestow me one sad memory—
One blessing—and forgive me, that, in thus
Tearing myself away from thee and life,
Perchance, I wound thy pride, or touch thy heart,
With unavoidable pain. Forgive me this,
And other errors, as, this dreary night,
When all is sleepless sorrow at my heart,
I do forgive thee, who art cause of all!
Farewell—farewell.” And thus the letter closed.


XI.
She had no tears—no language. From her lips
There broke no sound of sorrow, but her eye,
As if her sense yet lack'd the news it brought,
Did reperuse that fatal messenger,
In fear and hope. A little while she paused,
And then she sought her chamber, with no word
To those around. She had no strength for speech,
And did not dare, in the uncertain mood
Of her sad spirit, to look up and meet
The curious eyes that watch'd her. Much they sought,
By various questions and inquisitive glance,
To learn her secret;—for the tale was known—
How soon love's errors and misfortunes grow
The pastime of the cold and common crowd!—
That Albert had departed from the vale,
In foreign journey. And she turn'd away—
She sought to be alone with her own heart,
And long and sad their secret conference.
Her heart rebuked itself, her mind rebuked,
And all her feelings, self-retributive,
Reproach'd her with her error. Long the strife
They waged within her bosom, till she sank
In prayer, self-humbled—prostrate on the floor,
In true contrition.
“In a heedless hour,”
'Twas thus she murmur'd—“in a heedless hour,
My erring spirit, with a fond caprice,
Hath sported with its happiness too much;—
Father, forgive me—be the punishment
Forborne in mercy—teach him to forgive,
And, oh, restore him to me. In my grief
I do not heed the shame of such a prayer.
Restore him—teach him also to forgive.”
When she came forth again, her look was changed—
Her heart had been subdued. She had been weak,
She was now strengthen'd; yet her sorrow grew
From that same strengthening; for the scales were gone
That dimm'd her vision; and the full extent
Of her own loss grew clear and palpable!
Her error had been one of wantonness—
The last that love hath ever yet forgiven,
True love, that worships with a lofty heart
And even mood. She felt that she had erred,
And fear'd that he—the man of all the world
Whom most she loved—calm, true, and resolute,
Might prove inflexible. No trifler he,
Capricious with sweet feelings and fond ties,—
But stern, unbending in his principles!
His rigid purpose, noble and severe,
Tenacious pride, and changeless character,
Had been her boast, and best security!
It was her joy that no caprice of mood,
No passing influence of the idle time,
No popular show, no clamor from the crowd,
Could move him, erring, from the path of right,
Love's path and hers,—those sacred principles,
Which make all happiness, or make it naught!
How could she hope a change in such a man,
How love him still, if so that he could change,
Even to pity her? Her thought approved,
Though her heart grieved, his rigor and resolve.


XII.
“Ah, sweet,” cried he,* who, of a thousand sweets,
Hath sung most sweetly—“sweet, when winter frowns
And folds his ice-chain round us—sweet to dream
Of spring's enamoring charms, and gentle reign!
The hopeless heart thus cherishes the form
Of that which was a hope; even as we seal
The ashes of the loved one in an urn
We keep beside us, till we half forget
That it is ashes. Memory thus endows,
Even as a god, the insensate clay with life,
And hallows to the lone one, in a dream,
The old sweet faith, the perish'd love, and all,
That made earth worthy to its worshipper!
But if hope come not, in alliance close
With that creative genius, till we think
The past may be the future—if it be
That memory comes alone!—no guardian she,
But a stern tyrant, taught in cruel arts,
And sleepless as the agony of guilt.”
It was a sweet hope, counsell'd her to hope
Against conviction.
“He will come again,—
'Tis but awhile—he cannot long forbear—
He must forgive me, as, so help me heaven,
I had forgiven him even crueller wrongs,
And harsher words, than these.”
He did not come!—
That night—the next—the next—and weeks, went by,
Till hope grew sad and sicken'd in her heart,
And on her face a visible hand was laid,
As of a burning grief, a sleepless woe,
That would not be appeased.
And soon her friends
Beheld the change upon her, and they spoke
Harshly of Albert: then she chided them
Most sadly into silence, and forbade
That they should speak again upon her griefs,
Still was she not ungrateful for the care
That sought to comfort; and, as day by day,
Her face grew paler and her step more slow,
Her heart became more gentle than its wont,
And with a meekness, dovelike, and from heaven,
She won a fresher love from all that knew.

* Rousseau.

XIII.
And what of him—so sudden and so stern,
So quick of apprehension, so resolved,
So little merciful to his own heart,
So stern a judge of hers—what now of him?
What art may paint his feelings to the sense,
What eye perceive them, as, that fatal night,
He fled the insensate revel! He felt crush'd,
And the devoted feelings of his heart,
So long her homagers, now all recall'd,
Came home rebellious from that sweeter realm,
Where they had spent the hours so joyously.
They came to torture, and he fled with them,
Even as a fugitive—he fled from them,
Or strove to fly; but they pursued him close,
And tore him as he fled! In foreign lands
He made himself a home—if that may be
A home, which is a prison-house and scourge!
He made himself new comrades, day by day,
And fled from each in turn. He still went on,
And sought new dwellings, only to behold
Smiles change to frowns—seeking new friends and flowers,
To find the one grow cold—the other die.
The curse of hopelessness, and a premature blight,
Clung to him in his journey, and the doom
Of desolation was unchanged to him!—
In crowds, in camps, in cities, and in fields,
Where'er he fled, whatever home he sought,
'Twas written still, and Albert was alone.


XIV.
A bloody war waged in a neighbor land,
And the perpetual strife in his own mood
There led him, as if seeking sympathy,
To fields of danger. In the ranks of war
He soon became a leader. Fierce his ire,
Hot his pursuit, impetuous in assault,
Desperate in daring, and in perilous strife
Fatal his muscular arm. His men grew fond,
And joy'd in such a leader. Rash, not bold,
He hourly sought new dangers. Numbers stood
Between him and his aim. He counted not
The dense array, but, striking right and left,
He plunged where foes were thickest. Walls arose,
High, steep, and massive—ranging cannon poured
The rattling shot, like hail, upon his path,—
But did not stop him. Soon the walls were gained,
The banner of the foe beneath his foot,
His voice in victory shouting.
Where was death?
The foe he struck could answer, but the chief,
Who sought for the grim enemy in vain,
Went through the strife unharméd. The sharp sword
Swept by him edgeless—the directed ball,
Fatal, if sent against another breast,
Swerved harmlessly from his,—his doom was still
To live, though thousands perish'd—but alone!
And she!—the news was brought her that he fought
The battles of the Texians. That he stood
Upon the Alamo's walls, when the fierce tribes
Of Mexico, in numbers overspread
And crowded down the defenders—it was said,
That, striking to the last, each stroke a death,
The gallant chief was slain by many hands,
O'erpower'd, not conquer'd;—and the tale was told
By one most thoughtless, in a sudden tone,
That went even like an ice-bolt to her heart,
And froze its hope forever. From that hour,
The last sad change, foretelling all the rest,
Came o'er the maiden. Much they strove to cheer,
Or chide, her prisoner-mood, but all in vain.
They led her to the revel, with fond hope,
By change to cheer her; but she sicken'd there!—
The idle song of love, which fill'd her ears,
Was then a sadness! It reminded her
Of those she once had sung, when he was by
A listener in the moonlight. From the dance
She shrank away in horror!—What a throng
Of images most fearful came with it!
New suitors sought her, but they left her soon
As hopeless as herself! Nothing could change
The spirit of that mourner—nothing move
Her sorrow from its deep devotedness!—
Life's harmonies had gone, its strings that once,
Beneath Hope's finger, did discourse so long,
And such sweet music, gave but discord forth,—
Despair, not Hope, the one musician now!


XV.
A little longer, and our strain is done—
The story of love's sorrow is soon told,
A word will tell it always. Rosalie,—
'Twas but a few days when we saw her last,
There, sitting by her lattice, looking forth
Upon these waters. See the lattice now;—
How vacant, and how cheerless it appears.
We seek her elsewhere. But a week ago,
She sat, where last we saw her. It was night,
A soft and mellow evening, calm and clear.
A thousand beautiful forms were in the sky,
Light forms of fleece, that hung around the moon,
Like robes of regal splendor;—a sweet breath
Of perfume fill'd the air, and pleasant sounds,
Of winds and waters meeting, rose aloft,
In harmony to the spirit.
“The guitar”—
Feebly, to one who tended her, she spoke,
“Bring it, I pray thee:”—
And the damsel brought
The well-known instrument, so cherish'd once
When he was by, and yet untouch'd so long.
She play'd a soft, prelusive, pensive air,
And then the notes grew wanton. Fitfully,
Shadows of ancient melodies arose,
And vanish'd from the strings; until her hand
Seem'd resting only on the instrument,
Which sounded with the beatings of her pulse,
Unprompted by her will;—but, suddenly,
Her mood grew firm, and, most commandingly,
A bold and ranging melody she framed,
With nicest variations; and, awhile,
The strain was like the first flight of a bird,
Waking, at morning, with rejoicing wing,
And soaring, soaring upward, even to heaven.
Then, as the high tones of the instrument,
Grew soften'd as by distance, with her voice
She coupled sweetest thoughts, most gently framed
By suited language. Mournfully, she sang
A ditty of the saddest circumstance—
Of fortune long denied, and tenderest love,
That should have been, like some well-treasured flower,
Worn in the genial bosom, left to pale
Its leaves in hopeless blight; and, at the close,
Fondly and gently, thus she spoke of him!
“Yet, will I not reproach thee, though thou hast
Dealt most unkindly, Albert. 'Twas a fault,
A most unmaidenly fault—those words of mine:—
Yet might have been forgiven—should have been
Chidden, and then forgotten. 'Twas a child,
That spoke with little thought:—thou shouldst have known
My heart was with thee.
“But, 'tis over now;—
Thou wilt forgive me when I am no more,
And, as thy nature is all gentleness,
Even when thy word is sternest, well I know
Thou wilt reproach thyself, that thou hast been
So rigid with me.”
A faint cry below,
Broke in upon her speech—a cry of woe—
And, in another moment, through the leaves,
Came darting a strange form—yet not so strange,
When the next glance survey'd him. It was he—
'Twas Albert—and he came all penitent,
And sorrowing for his sternness. In his arms,
She sank most fondly, and yet speechlessly.
“Forgive me, dearest Rosalie!” he cried:
“Too long forgetful of thy worth and claims,
I come to thee at last;—forgive me all—
I was too rash—too cruel,—thou hast been
The sufferer at my hands, and I have wrong'd thee
Beyond atonement,—yet, I pray thee smile:
Look up and say—look up, my well beloved,
And bless me with thy smile—and, with thy words,
Say, thou forgivest me.”
The dim eyes unclosed,
The bosom heaved in sighs—a bright smile spread,
From the sweet lips, and from the kindling eye,
Over her pallid face, and then it pass'd,
Even like some soft and rosy cloud at eve,
Suddenly, from the sight.
“I am forgiven!—
That eye hath said it—from those lips it came,
Even though they spoke not,—and this heaving breast,
Sent me its pardon in that gentle sigh.
Yet, speak to me, beloved,—speak to me!—
What means this silence?—speak to me—but once!
But once!—Help, there!—some water—quickly bring,
Or she will die in my arms!—God!—she is dead,
And I have slain her!”
Truly, had he said.
The parted breath that would have spoke in mercy,
Had made its way to heaven. He was alone—
The destiny of Albert was not done—
And forth he fled—and still he fled, alone.

A STORY OF GOD'S JUDGMENT.
A LEGEND OF GEORGIA.

I.
A GRANDAM, by the cottage door,
At evening, when the sun
Left hues among the forest trees
That gilded every one,
Thus, in the grandchild's listening ear,
Who gather'd at her knee,
“A tale of God's own judgment, child,
Thy mother tells to thee.


II.
“A tale of God's own judgment, child,
And how the deed was known,
And how they took the murderer,
And punishment was done—
Give ear, and thou shalt hear, my child,
And heedful be thy sense,
For know that crime, or soon or late,
Will have intelligence.


III.
“Will have intelligence, my child,
And find a tongue, whose sound,
Like church-bell in the wilderness,
Will rouse the people round.—
Wouldst hear this cruel tale, my child?”
The young boy, at her knee,
Upstarted, and, with accent wild,
Cried, “Gran'am, tell it me!”


IV.
“Once on a time,” in good old phrase,
The dame began the tale;—
“Just where the town of Macon stands
There ran the Indian trail;—
'Twas there the cruel deed was done,
There was no Macon then,
And but a single house was there,
Kept by two aged men.


V.
“These old men in the wilderness,
They kept the house that stood
Upon the Indian trail that ran,
For ages, through the wood;
And there the traveller stay'd by night,
Who journey'd out in quest
Of those rich prairie lands that make
So famous all the West.


VI.
“Thus bent for Al'bamá, my child,
A seeking lands one day,
Three strangers to the old men's house,
Came riding on their way;
Two were rough men, with heavy beards,
And very coarse of speech,
But the young one was a gentleman,
And far above their reach.


VII.
“Ay, far above their reach was he,
That gentleman so fair,
With a sweet smile and countenance,
And long and sandy hair,—
He talk'd with them, and freely told.
The business that he had;—
For, you see, there was a maiden fair,
Whose smiles had made him glad.


VIII.
“Her smiles had made him glad, my child,
And he was bent to find
A pleasant spot and fruitful lands,
To satisfy her mind—
And they were to be wed as soon
As, finding what he sought,
He should convey the tidings home,
Of lands which he had bought.


IX.
“He had the wealth to buy the lands,
And with never a thought or care,
In evil hour he show'd the bills,
In the wallet that he bare;
Nor mark'd the eyes, so dark with sin,
They fix'd upon the book,
Nor how they suddenly cast them down,
Lest he should see the look.


X.
“He did not see the look, alas!
Else he were much to blame,
To go a-travelling on with them,
When the next morning came.
And on they started by the dawn,—
The twain were first abroad,—
But soon the youthful gentleman
Came riding down the road.


XI.
“And riding down the road so wild,
You would have thought the three,
So frank was that young gentleman,
Were all one company.
And pleasantly enough they went,
Till towards noon they came
To an old Indian settlement—
Chilicté was its name.


XII.
“Chilicté was its name, my child,
But all deserted then—
'Twas by the burial-place alone,
You knew the homes of men;
The woods grew thick about the spot,
And the hills rose darkly round,
And a hush in the air fill'd the soul with fear,
Of the stillness so profound.


XIII.
“But the owl he made his dwelling there,
And as the sun went down,
He hooted aloud to the silent air,
And he claim'd it for his own:
The night-hawk wheel'd, and the bat went round
In his dizzy circles fast,
And the owl drew nigher, with every hoot,
To the road, as the travellers pass'd.


XIV.
“O'er the road he sat, on a blighted bough,
And down he stared as they sped beneath,
And his great eyes gloom'd 'neath his hornéd brow,
With a fearful look of death.
With a stifled breath the three went on,—
The path grew hard to find,
And while the youth rode on with one,
The other dropp'd behind.


XV.
“He dropp'd behind with cruel thought,
And while his comrade spoke,
With heavy arm and loaded whip,
He struck a sudden stroke—
And down the light-hair'd stranger fell,
As quickly and as low
As heavy ox, that swims and reels
Beneath the butcher's blow.


XVI.
“It was a butcher's blow he gave,
And wild the stranger cried,
To spare his life, and let him live
For his young and promised bride.
But they had not a thought for her,
And spoke an idle jest—
Then knelt, and stuck the fatal knife,
Twice, deep into his breast.


XVII.
“Twice, deeply did they stick the knife,
And no more prayer had he:
One blow had been enough for life—
He perish'd instantly.
And from his breast they took the spoil,—
The money which had bought
Their souls for that old serpent, child,
That all this mischief wrought.


XVIII.
“The mischief all was wrought, and vain
To wish it now undone;—
They took the body up, and hid
The secret from the sun.
And in a hollow of the hills,
In that old Indian town,
They stript the dead youth silently,
And dropp'd the body down.


XIX.
“They dropp'd him down, nor buried him,
But left him bleeding, bare;
Though well they knew, at night, the wolf
And wild-cat would be there.
And then, with fear that look'd behind,
They rode upon their way,
And thought they heard upon the wind,
A voice that bade them stay.


XX.
“A voice that bade them stay, they heard,
And then a laugh and scream,
And such they heard in after years,
In many a midnight dream—
But on they rode, nor linger'd then,
And, day by day, they went,
Till, like the wealth of drinking men,
The money soon was spent.


XXI.
“The money soon was spent, and so—
(Now years had past)—they thought,
To part awhile, and each pursue
The scheme his fancy taught;
And one went down to New Orleans,
The other, hardier yet,
Took the same road on which, before,
The murder'd youth he met.


XXII.
“The murder'd youth, on that same road,
He met, long years before,
And, with a sinner's hardihood,
The spot he travell'd o'er—
Till as the evening shadows fell,
In glimpses, through the trees,
The reedy-rimm'd Ockmulgé stream,
By Macon town, he sees.


XXXIII.
“By Macon town—‘what change is here!
The place is not the same.’
He looks,—a city rises there,
He does not know its name.
The old fort is in ruins too,
He marks the broken guns,
Some tumbled to the very brink,
Where dark Ockmulgé runs.


XXIV.
“He sees the dark Ockmulgé run,
And now he draws him nigh,
But neither boat nor boatman comes,
Although he shouts full high—
Yet, while he looks, a silent skiff
Shoots outward from the banks,
Where osiers and the matted canes,
Stand up in solid ranks.


XXV.
“From out their solid ranks, the skiff
Shoots silent o'er the stream,
The murderer stares—he shuts his eyes—
He feels as in a dream:
For who should paddle then that skiff
Upon the swelling flood,
But the same youth, that, years before,
He murder'd down the road.


XXVI.
“The youth he murder'd down the road,
The knife stuck in his breast!—
Two cruel wounds, and each a death,
Yet there he would not rest.
Wild grew the murderer's spirit then,
And white as chalk his cheek—
And when the boatman's bark drew nigh,
He had no word to speak.


XXVII.
“He had no word to speak to him—
The boatman waved his hand;
And with no thought, yet full of fear,
He came at his command—
And trembled much, though much he strove
His shiv'ring dread to hide;—
And held the bridle of his steed,
That swam the skiff beside.


XXVIII.
“The good steed swam beside the skiff,
And though he held the rein,
It were a speech too much to say
He thought of him again.
His thought was of that boatman there,
And of the wicked time,
When, journeying o'er that very road,
He did the deed of crime.


XXIX.
“The deed of crime was in his thought,
And all his limbs were weak;—
He strove in vain—his tongue was parch'd,
And no word could he speak:
A cold wind went through all his bones,—
His hair stood up on end,—
To slay him then, had surely been
The kindness of a friend.


XXX.
“But the kindness of a friend is not
For him who slays, like Cain,
The brother, who, confiding, goes
Beside him on the plain—
And so, the murderer reach'd the shore,
And with a desperate speed,
He dash'd the passage-money down,
And leapt upon his steed.


XXXI.
“He leapt upon his steed and flew,
Nor look'd upon the way;
Nor heeded that remember'd voice
That loudly bade him stay:
‘How came ye over the river, friend?’
Cried one who mark'd his flight,—
‘When the boat was swamp'd in the heavy fresh
And the ferryman drown'd, last night?


XXXII.
“‘The ferryman drown'd last night, friend,
And the boat lies high and dry,—
And well I know no steed can ford,
When the river runs so high.’
There was fearful sense in every word,
And the murderer's brain grew wild,
For still he heard, for evermore,
The cryings of a child.


XXXIII.
“The cryings of a child he heard,
And a voice of innocence—
Then a pleading note, and a prayer of doom,
To the awful providence.
And, ever and anon, a crash,
Of the terrible thunder, came,—
And he shut his eyes, for out of the wood,
There leapt a flash of flame.


XXXIV.
“There leapt a flash of flame, and so,
With a blindness strange, he flew,
And the goodly steed that then he rode,
Alone the pathway knew,—
And the blood grew cold in his bosom, when
He reach'd the town he sought,—
And down he sank on the tavern steps,
And he had no farther thought.


XXXV.
“He had no thought, but in a swoon
For a goodly hour he lay;
And the gathering crowd came nigh, and strove
To drive his sleep away.
And while they wonder'd much, he woke,
His eye glared strange with light—
For the face of the murder'd man did seem
Still full before his sight.


XXXVI.
“Still full the eyes of the murder'd man
Peer'd ever as he lay;
And with fury then, the murderer rose,
Like one in a sudden fray—
And he drew from his bosom a deadly knife,
And, with no let, he ran,
And plunged it deep in the breast of him
Who look'd like the murder'd man.


XXXVII.
“He look'd like the murder'd man no more,
For as with the stroke he fell,
The madness fled from the murderer's sense,
And he knew his own brother well.—
'Twas that same brother, who with him slew
The youth, many long years gone;
And the fearful doom for that evil deed
Will now be quickly done.


XXXVIII.
“ 'Twill soon be done, for the judge is there,
And he reads the doom of death,—
And the murderer told of his evil life,
With the truth of a dying breath.
They hung him high where the cross roads meet,
Close down by the gravel ford;
And they left his farther doom, my child,
To the ever blessed Lord.”


XXXIX.
Upstarted then the listening boy,—
“Now tell me, oh, tell me, dame,—
And what of the sweet young lady,
And what of her became?
Who told her, then, of the gentle youth,
And how, in that savage glen,
The knife was stuck in his bosom,
By the hands of those cruel men?”


XL.
“Out, out, my child,—was it right to tell
Such a tale to the maiden true?—
They had no name for the murder'd man,
And the story she never knew.
And they had no word to comfort her,
And paler her cheek grew, day by day,—
Till the cruel grief, ere a year had gone,
Had eaten her heart away.”

THE LAST FIELDS OF THE BILOXI;
A TRADITION OF LOUISIANA.
THE Bay of Pascagoula is a lovely and retired spot, lying at nearly equal travelling distances between the cities of Mobile and New Orleans. It has long been famous among persons of taste in those cities for its quiet beauties; but more so on account of a very singular and sweet superstition which pertains to it. A remarkable, and most spiritual kind of music, is heard above and around its waters, from which it is supposed to issue. The sound is fitful, occurring by day and night, at all hours, sometimes with more or less strength and fulness, but always very sweet and touching in its strains. Some compare it to the wind-harp, which, indeed, it sometimes most wonderfully resembles. Others liken it to the humming of an insect of great and curious powers. The Indian tradition explanatory of this music,—which no philosophical speculation has yet ventured to disturb,—is one of a beauty not often surpassed. The story goes that the whole Southwest was once controlled, and in the possession of a people called the Biloxi; that these people had attained a very high, if not a perfect civilization—that they were versed in various arts, profound lovers of music, and were finally enervated by the arts which they possessed. They were overrun and conquered by the fiercer tribes coming from the West. They made a last stand on the borders of the sea, by Pascagoula, when driven from all other positions. Here they erected a fortress, the ruins of which are still said to be seen; though the work so described as theirs was probably erected by some of the roving bands of Spanish and French who first brought European civilization into the country. The last struggles of the Biloxi were protracted, as became the efforts of a brave nation fighting for life and liberty. But they fought in vain. Famine came in to the assistance of their enemies, and unconditional submission or death were the only alternatives. They chose the last; and men, women, and children proceeded to the sacrifice—which was as solemn, and perhaps more touching, than that of the citizens of Numantia under like circumstances. Throwing open the gates of their fortress, at a moment when the assailants were withdrawn, they marched down to the waters of the bay, singing their last song of death and defiance. With unshaken resolution they pressed forward until the waters finally engulfed them all. None survived. The strange spiritual music of the Bay of Pascagoula is said to be the haunting echo of that last melancholy strain. * * Such is one of the traditions respecting this mysterious music; and the one which we most prefer. Another legend is agreeably reported by Mr. Gayarré, in his late work on the picturesque and romantic in the history of Louisiana. It is due to the reader that he should be put in possession of this other version of the story. Gayarré describes the music as occurring mostly at the mouth of the Pascagoula River, and as seeming to float upon the waters, particularly in a calm moonlight. “It seems to issue from caverns or grottoes in the bed of the river, and sometimes oozes up through the water, under the very keel of the boat which contains the inquisitive traveller whose ear it strikes as the distant concert of a thousand æolian harps. On the banks o the river, close by the spot where the music is heard, tradition says there existed a tribe different in color and in other peculiarities from the rest of the Indians. Their ancestors had originally emerged from the sea, where they were born, and were of a light complexion. They were a gentle, gay, inoffensive race, living chiefly on oysters and fish, and they passed their time in festivals and rejoicings. They had a temple in which they adored a mermaid. Every night when the moon was visible, they gathered round the beautifully carved figure of the mermaid, and with instruments of strange shape, worhipped that idol with such soul-stirring music as had never before blessed human ears.
“One day, a short time after the destruction of Mauvila or Mobile, in 1539, by Soto and his companions, there appeared among them a white man, with a long gray beard, flowing garments, and a large cross in his right hand. He drew from his bosom a book, which he kissed reverentially, and he began to explain to them what was contained in that sacred little cusket. Tradition does not say how he came suddenly to acquire the language of those people when he attempted to communicate to them the solemn truths of the Gospel. It must have been by the operation of that faith which, we are authoritatively told, will remove mountains. Be it as it may, the holy man, in the course of a few months, was proceeding with much success in his pious undertaking, and the work of conversion was going on bravely, when his purposes were defeated by an awful prodigy.
“One night, when the moon at her zenith poured on heaven and earth, with more profusion than usual, a flood of light angelic, at the solemn hour of twelve, when all in nature was repose and silence, there came, on a sudden, a rushing on the surface of the river, as if the still air had been flapped into a whirlwind by myriads of invisible wings sweeping onward. The water seemed to be seized with convulsive fury; uttering a deep grean, it rolled several times from one bank to the other with rapid oscillations, and then gathered itself up into a towering column of foaming waves, on the top of which stood a mermaid, looking with magnetic eyes that could draw almost every thing to her, and singing with a voice which fascinated into madness. The Indians and the priest, their new guest, rushed to the bank of the river to contemplate this supernatural spectacle. When she saw them, the mermaid tuned her tones into still more bewitching melody, and kept changing a sort of mystic song, with this often-repeated ditty:—‘Come to me, come to me, children of the sea,Neither bell, book, nor cross, shall win ye from your queen.’
“The Indians listened with growing ecstasy, and one of them plunged into the river, to rise no more. The rest, men, women, and children, followed in quick succession, moved, as it were, with the same irresistible impulse. When the last of the race disappeared, a wild laugh of exultation was heard; down returned the river to its bed with the roar of a cataract, and the whole scene seemed to have been but a dream. Ever since that time is heard occasionally the distant music which has excited so much attention and investigation. The other Indian tribes of the neighborhood have always thought that it was their musical brethren, who still keep up their revels at the bottom of the river, in the palace of the mermaid. Tradition further relates that the poor priest died in an agony of grief, and that he attributed this awful event, and victory of the powers of darkness, to his not having been in a perfect state of grace when he attempted the conversion of those infidels. It is believed, also, that he said on his death-bed, that those deluded pagan souls would be redeemed from their bondage and sent to the kingdom of heaven, if, on a Christmas night, at twelve of the clock, when the moon shall happen to be at her meridian, a priest should dare to come alone to that musical spot, in a boat propelled by himself, and should drop a crucifix into the water. But, alas! if this be ever done, neither the holy man nor the boat are to be seen again by mortal eyes. So far, the attempt has not been made; skeptic minds have sneered, but no one has been found bold enough to try the experiment.”
The reader has now both the leading traditions before him, and can choose between them. It will be seen, that, in the narrative which follows, I prefer the former version of the legend. The Poet is supposed to be a spectator of the scene,—one greatly ravished with the quiet and sweet beauty of the landscape, and beguiled by it into a long train of dreamy speculations, which insensibly conduct him to the state of mind when he shall be most susceptible to spiritual influences. It is then that he is suddenly made aware of the awakening murmurs of the mysterious music. The reflections which precede the revelation are designed as a natural prelude to the strain.
THE LAST FIELDS OF THE BILOXI.

I.
BEAUTIFUL spread these waters 'neath mine eye,
Glassy and bright, with myrtles overhung;
Blue stretch the heavens above them—in their depths,
Far down reflected—arch more beautiful,
Seen through the mellowing medium of the wave,
Than in its native empire,—spann'd above,
Blazing, all cloudless, with the noonday star.
I wander by the islets near the sea,
That, from the Mexique bay, a tribute deep,
Rolls in on Pascagoula. There it sinks,
And sleeps with faintest murmurs; or, with strife
Brought from more turbulent regions, still bears on,
With threatening crest, and lips of whitening foam,
To battle with Biloxi. Short the strife!
Feebler at each recoil, its languid waves
Fling themselves, listless, on the yellow sands,
With a sweet chiding, as of grief that moans,
Oblivious not in slumber, of the strife,
That slumber still subdues. A dream of peace
Succeeds, and all her images arise,
To hallow the fair picture. Ocean sleeps
Lock'd in by earth's embrace. Her islets stand
Gray sentinels, that guard her waste domain,
And, from their watch-towers station'd by the deep,
Survey the midnight legions of the Gulf,
Numberless, wild, in their blue armor clad,
Forever bent on spoil. A sweet repose
Hangs o'er the groves, and on the sloping shore
And the far ocean. Not a murmur chides
The sacred silence. From the lone lagoon,
The patriarch of the ancient pelican,
Leads forth his train; though not with plashy wing
Break they the glassy stream, whose buoyant wave
Maintains each breast, and still reflects each form,
Without a riple on its face to mar
The perfect image. Gliding thus, they steer
To islands of green rushes, where they hide
In sports most human;—in white glimpses seen,—
Or by the light tops of the reeds that stoop,
Divided in the press of struggling forms.
But rapture hath a reign as short as peace—
The wild fowls' sports are ended. They repose
By the still marge of lakes, that, in the embrace
Of groves of cane and myrtle, steal away,
And crouch in sleep secure; while through the Gulf
Rolls the black hurricane. The summer noon
Prevails. A universal hush
Absorbs the drowsy hours, and Nature droops
With sweetness; as upon the listless eyes
Of beauty, steal the images of dreams,
Made up of star-crown'd hopes and truest loves,
And joy's own purple prospects. The still air
Falters with perfume of delicious fruits;—
The orange flings its fragrance to the seas,
Wooing the zephyr thence; and lo! he comes
Fresh from the toiling conflict with the deep,
Upon whose breast, subduing and subdued,
He snatches fitful rest. The glassy wave,
Smooth and serene as heaven, is broken now
Into complaining ripples. Now, his breath
Sweeps the rush islands, while the tall reed stoops
Its feathery crest to ocean. The gray sands,
Whirl'd suddenly beneath his arrowy tread,
Pursue his flight in vain;—and now he glides
Over the sacred bay, whose clear serene
Is whimpled by his wing. Anon, he stirs
The orange blossoms,—drinks full surfeit thence,
And sleeps among their leaves.


II.
I lay me down
In the sweet keeping of the wilderness,
Listless and blest as he! No wild to me,
Though lonely, all the silent groves and streams,
That slumber in my glance. For I have been
A wanderer, and denied all human ties:—
I made my friends among the hills and streams
Least loved or sought by man. To me, they wear
Aspects of love and kindness. Voices call,
And fair hands beckon me from alleys green,
Amidst a world of shadow;—solitudes
That woo the thoughtful footstep, and persuade
To realms of pensive silence,—beautiful groves,
Sad only, as their beauty blooms unsought.


III.
These win me from my path. I turn aside;
My heart drinks in the sweetness of the scene
I gaze on;—and how lovelier grows the spot,
To him who comes in love! I bow my head—
Where still she holds her matchless sov'reignty—
To all endowing Nature. Here she sits
Supreme, in tangled bower, and sunny mead,
And high umbrageous forest. At her feet,
Broad lakes spread forth their bosoms to the skies,
Whose beauties still they bear. Sweet fountains swell
From loneliest depths, among the hidden dells,
That, crouching 'neath the sway of sullen hills,
Yet send their crystal sorrows down the stream,
In secret channels; that the world may seek,
And free them from their darksome prison-place.
Tree, flower, and leaf, consorting with her mood,
Impress their calm on mine. I lay me down,
Within her solemn temple. Altars rise
About me, of green turf; and tufted beds,
Of grassy and blue flowers, beneath my head,
Pillow it gently. Mightiest subjects stand
Around me, grouped, and bending still, to serve—
Thick-bearded giants, that spread wide their arms,
And shield me from the burning shafts of noon.


IV.
Now, sweeter than the soft recorder's voice,
Or lute of ravishing syren, in mine ear,
This gentle diapason of the woods—
This sacred concert,—airs with bending pines,
Whose murmurs melt to one, and part again
With new accords,—with now a catch of song,
From bird that starts and sleeps. The fancy glows
In spiritual converse, as I dream
Of the old fated men of these sweet plains,—
Departed—all their dwelling-places waste,
And their wild gods grown powerless!
Powerless?—No!
They have a spell for fancy, and a charm
To waken echoes in the dreaming heart;
And from the prompt and sleepless sympathies,
Extort unfailing homage. For the Past,
They live, and live forever! That which speaks
For the sole moral of the faded race,
Dies not when it hath perished. Song will speak,—
Tradition, and the venerable groves,
With mounds, and fragments of old implements,
Even for the heathen;—as in temples, books,
Old columns, and the echoes of deep strains
From Phœbus-smitten minstrels, still survive
The proofs of mightier nations—godlike proofs,
That challenge human toil, the tooth of time,
And speak when he is voiceless. These connect
Races which mingle not; whose separate eyes—
By years and ocean separate—never saw
Their mutual aspects; yet, by sympathies,
Born of like trials, strifes, and mightiest deeds,
Yearn for communion,—yearn to see and love;
And when the earthquake threatens, bear, in flight,
Each glorious token of the transmitted race.


V.
Thus lives the savage god. Here, still, he roves
Among his hills made consecrate. Here, still,—
By this broad glassy lake, among these groves
Of yellow fruits and fragrance,—o'er yon isles,
The limit of his reign,—his old gray eye
Still ranges, as if watchful of the trust
His sway no more may compass.
—Yet, no more
Gather the simple tribes that bow'd the knee,
In love, or deprecation of his wrath;—
No more from plain to hill-top glows the pile
Fired in his sacrifice;—and, to glad his ear,
Rolls the deep strain of forest worshippers,
A wild and antique song of faith and fear,
No more! no more!


VI.
——'Tis sure a dream that stirs
These sounds within my soul; or, do I hear
A swell of song,—sweet, sad, upon mine ear,
That, like a wayward chant from out the sea,
Rises and floats along the yellow sands!
A note most like the wind-harp, hung in trees
Where the coy zephyr harbors. Still it comes,
In more elaborate windings; with a tone
Most human, and a fitfulness of sound
That speaks for various woes, as if it link'd
The deep, despairing, still defying cry,
From man in his last struggle,—with the shriek
Of passionate woman, not afraid to die,
Though pleading still for pity,—and the scream
Of childhood, conscious only of the woes
It feels not, but beholds in those who feel,
Unutterable still! A long-drawn plaint,
It swells and soars, until the difficult breath
Fails me;—I gasp;—I may not follow it
With auditory sense! It glows—it spreads—
'Till the whole living atmosphere is flush
With the strange harmony; and now it sinks,
Sudden, but not extinguished! A faint tone
Survives, in quivering murmurs, that awhile
Tremble like life within the flickering pulse
Of the consumptive. Losing it, we hush
Our breathing; and suspend the struggling sense,
Whose utterance mars its own; and still we hear
Its mellow and lone cadences, that float,
Prolong'd, and finally lost, as the deep sounds
Superior rise, of winds and waving trees!


VII.
It is a sweet tradition of these shores,
Told by the Choctaw, that, when ages gone,
His savage sire descended from the west,
A dark and desperate hunter,—all these woods,
From the rich valleys where the Missouri bounds,
To mix his turbid waters with the streams
Of him, the Sire of Waters,*—to the blue hills
Of Apalachia,—dwelt a numerous race,
Named “The Biloxi.” Towns and villages,
Cities and colleges, and various arts,
Declared their vast antiquity. They were proud—
More proud than all the living tribes of men;
Wiser, and versed in many sciences;
And, from their towers of earth, that sought the skies,
In emulous mountain-stretches, watch'd the stars,
In nightly contemplation. With a skill
Wondrous, by other tribes unmatchable,
They rear'd high temples, which they fill'd with forms
Of love and beauty. In their thousand homes,
Joy was a living presence. There they danced
At evening; while the mellow song went forth,
Married to fitting strains, from instruments
Of curious form, but fill'd with strangest power,
That, when the savage hearken'd, half subdued
His bloody thirst, and made the reptile's fang
Forget his venomous office. By these arts
Were they at last betray'd. They soon forgot
The vigorous toils of manhood, and grew weak,
Incapable of arms. Voluptuous joys,
Morning and evening in their courts, surprised
The strength of their young people, till they grew,
Like the rank grass upon the bearded plain,
Fit for the fire and scythe.

* The Mississippi.

VIII.
——The Choctaw Chief
Look'd, from his dusky hills, upon their vales,
Exulting. When he heard their songs of love,
That floated upward on the perfumed air,
And saw, below, their loose, effeminate forms
Link'd in voluptuous dance,—he shouted loud
His scornful satisfaction; while he bade
His warriors nigh, to look upon their homes,
And mark their easy victims. They, below,
By happiness made deaf and arrogant,
Heard not the mighty discord, which, above,
Mock'd their soft harmonies. Their dream went on;
The midnight dance and revel; the sweet song
Of love and gold-eyed fancy; and the prayer,
Unbroken, of true genius, in his cell,
Toiling, with pen or pencil, to prepare
His triumph for the adoring eyes of day!


IX.
But with day came the conflict. The fierce tribes,
With hellish shout, that shook the affrighted walls
Till the high temples quaked, rush'd down the vale,
Smiting with heavy mace; or, from above,
Shooting their poison'd arrows at each mark,
Unerring. Though surprised, the Biloxi fought
Fiercely, and with an ardency of soul
Superior to their strength. The savage press'd
More resolute when baffled. Day by day,
Some citadel was won—some lovelier town
Despoil'd by the barbarian. Thousands fell
In conflict; yet the thousands that remain'd
Breathed nothing but defiance. With each loss,
Rose a new spirit in their hopeless breasts,
That warm'd them with fresh courage; and they swore
A terrible oath, with link'd hands, each in each,
And all, to their old deities, to yield
Life first, and freedom never! Well they kept
Their sacramental pledges. They could die,
But could not conquer. Yielding sullenly
Each foothold, they departed from the towns
They could no more maintain; and, fighting, fled;
Till from the hills of Memphis—from the springs
Of Loosahatchie—from the golden ridge,
Where the gay streams of Noxabee arise,—
Contented captives that complain not oft
Against the rocks, that, from the western streams,
Bar their free passage—gradual still they fled—
Still turning, still at bay, and battling oft
The dread pursuer.


X.
——To this spot they came—
They pitch'd their tents where Pascagoula flows,
Through shallows of gray shells, and finds its way
To the embraces of the purple Gulf.
“Here!” said the Prince—his subjects gather'd round—
“Make the last stand! The land beneath our feet
Slips rapidly, and farther flight is none,
Save to the ocean. We must stand and die!”


XI.
Sad were their hearts, but fearless. Not a lip
Spoke for submission. Soul and arm were firm;
And here, in resolute silence, they threw up
Their earthen ramparts. On the narrow walls
Of their rude fortress, in that perilous hour,
Ranged their few champions. To the hills, their eyes
Turn'd ever, till the savage rose in sight.
Then took they up their weapons. Flight no more
Was in their choice; but, in its place, there came,
From hopelessness, resolve—and such resolve,
As makes man terrible as fate. They stood,
Silent, with lips compress'd. No answering shout
Admonish'd the invader of the strength
Thus newly found; and down his warriors rush'd,
As to an easy conquest. But they shrunk,—
And wonder'd whence should come the singular might,
So sudden, of a race so feeble late!
Days, weeks, and months, and the Biloxi fought,
Invincible. Their narrow boundary grew
More strong and powerful, in the invader's eyes,
Than had been their sole empire. Spring, at length,
Put on her flowers. Green leaves and blossoming fruits
Declared for mercy; but the barbarian tribes,
Strengthen'd by fiercer thousands from the west,
Maintain'd the leaguer. Rescue there was none;
Despair had no more strength, for famine sapp'd
The hearts of the Biloxi.


XII.
One bright noon
Beheld them met in council—women and men;
The mother newly made, with the young babe,
Unconscious, striving at her bloodless breasts;—
For all are equal in the hour of woe,
And all are heard, or none!—
It needed not
That they should ask what doom awaited them!
They saw it in the tottering march—the face,
Pinch'd by lean famine;—the imperfect speech,
That falter'd with the syllable prolong'd;—
The hollow eyes from which a spiritual glare
Shot out like death. They saw it in all sights,
And sounds, that fate, in that protracted term
Of struggle and endurance, still vouchsafed;—
And there was silence—a long, dreary pause
Broken by feminine sobs. Then spoke the Prince,
Last of a line of kings!—
——“Shall we submit
To bonds and probable torture, or go forth,
Made free by death?”
Brief silence follow'd then:—
In that brief silence, memories of years,
And ages, crowded thick. Years of delight—
Ages of national fame! They thought of all
The grace of their old homes,—the charm, the song,
Pure rights and soothing offices,—and pride,
Made household, by the trophies, richly strown,
Through court and chamber, of creative art;—
All lost!—and then the probable doom of bonds,—
The only slavery,—the superior race
Bow'd to the base and barbarous!—and one voice
Proclaim'd the unanimous will of all—to die!


XIII.
That eve, while yet within the western heavens,
Linger'd the rosy sunset—while the waves
Lay calm before them in the crystal bay,
And the soft winds were sleeping—and a smile,
As of unbroken peace and happiness,
Mantled the glittering forest green, and far,
Sprinkled the yellow beach with glinting fires,
That shone like precious gems;—the destined race
Threw wide their fortress gate. Thence went they forth
In sad procession. At their head, the Prince,
Who still had led their fortunes;—then, the chiefs,
And soldiers—few, but fearless;—the old men—
Patriarchs, who still remain'd,—memorials
Of the more fortunate past—and, last of all,
The women and the children. 'Twas an hour,
When Nature craved a respite from her toils;
And, from the strife withdrawn, the savage foe
Were distant, in their woodland tents retired.
These started with strange wonder to behold
The solemn march, unwitting of its end
And glorious aim; nor strove they to disturb
The rights which they divined not. On they went,
That ancient nation. Weapons bore they none;
But with hands cross'd upon their fearless hearts,
The warriors led the way. The matron clung
To her son's arm, that yielded no support.
The infant, hush'd upon its mother's breast,
Was sleeping; but the mother's sobs were still
Audible with her song;—and, with her song,
Rose that of thousands, mingling in one strain!
The art which in their happier days had been
Most loved among them, in spontaneous voice,
Unsummon'd, pour'd itself upon the air,
As, slowly, but with steps unfaltering still,
March'd the pale band, self-destined to the deep!
Never had Ocean in his balmiest hours,
Look'd less like death—less terrible, less wild!
An infant's slumber had not been more free
From all commotion. Beautiful and bright,
In the declining sunset, lay the scene
That witness'd the sad sacrifice; and sweet,
Like the fair prospect, was the united song,—
That epicedium o'er a nation's fate,
Self-chanted, which went with them to the waves,
And still survives them—breathing, from their graves,
The story of their empire,—of its fame,—
Its fall, and their devoted faith that knew
No life unbless'd with freedom. Sweetest strain!—
Once more it rises into sounds, that grow
Human in strength; and now, it floats away,
Subdued and sinking, as in that sad hour
When its last breathings from the warrior's throat
Stopp'd suddenly; and through the desolate air
Went a more desolate hush that told the rest!

THE HUNTER OF CALAWASSEE;
A LEGEND OF SOUTH CAROLINA.

I.
WHEN bites, in bleak November, the blast that rives the tree,
And scatters wide the yellow leaves, so sweetly sad to see,
Its voice's moaning murmur, borne through the trembling wood,
Awakes the heedful hunter up, and stirs his drowsy blood;—
In ancient times a summons meet,* for all who struck the deer,
He will not be the last to heed, who's still the first to hear;
He plucks the rifle from its rest, he winds the yellow horn,
And sweet the music of the sound through all the forest borne.

* The fall of the leaf was always the signal for ancient hunting.

II.
'Way down where ghostly cypress and dodder'd oaks spread free,
By the winding fen of Calawass, and on to Ocketee,
The mellow notes go searching far, the bloodhound's bay is full,—
Shame light upon that hunter now whose bosom's beat is dull!
There's life within that bugle note, steeds snort and riders shout,
And life, in every bound they take, is gushing gladly out;
A spirit rends the thicket,—upstarts the couchant deer,
Shakes from his sluggish flanks the dew, and bounds away in fear.


III.
“Now sound your horns,” cried Kedar, “and let the hunt be up,
And bring me, ere we start, my boy, a strong and stirring cup;
The air is keen and searching, and sadly, in my breast,
The blood, that should be bounding still, lies lazily at rest;
Not long to rest, for, by my soul, and all the saints! I swear,
This day I perish, or I kill the buck that harbors here,—
That one-horn'd buck;”—“Nay, swear not so, dear master,” thus he cried,
The aged slave, who then drew nigh and stood by Kedar's side.


IV.
“Now, out upon thy coward soul!” cried Kedar to the slave;
“Thou wast a man upon a time,—my father thought thee brave;
But age has dull'd thy spirit—thy limbs have need of rest,
This air's too keen for such as thou—go, harbor in thy nest;
Fool-fears have quell'd thy manhood, and, in this buck I seek,
Thou find'st a foe whose very name 'twould white thy lips to speak;
But though he be the fiend himself, and stand before my eyes,
This day I hunt him down, I say, and deer or hunter dies!”


V.
Then sadly spoke that aged slave—“Oh, master, swear not so—
Leave hunting of this one-horn'd buck, that's like no beast we know;
He makes no slot,* no entry* leaves, though through the closest brakes
Of bush, or cane, or thicket swamp, his headlong course he takes:
Still bears the same erected port, and never frays a head;—*
Two seasons have you hunted him, and still with evil sped;
Some grievous chance hath ever happ'd when on his
The first”—“Now, fool,” then Kedar cried, “be still for very

* Old Lauto is somewhat more learned in his terms than most of the drivers of the southern country; and, for the sake of his brethren, some little explanation may be given here. These are all terms of the chase in ancient English hunting; and are furnished to me, at second hand, from Gascoigne's “Commendation of the noble Arte of Venerie.” The slot is the print of a stag's foot upon the ground; entries are places through which deer have lately passed, by which their size is conjectured; frayings are the pillings of their horns; and a deer is said to “fray a head” when he rubs it against a tree to cause the outer coat to fall away in the season of renewal. These nice traits of the hunt, by which the hunter learns all that is desirable to know of the game he seeks, form, however, but a small number of those in the collection of the experienced in this “noble arte.”

VI.
“Sound, hunters, ere this idle tale arrest the sluggish blood,
And lend to braver hearts than his yon aged dotard's mood;
It is my oath this day to track that buck unto his den,
And we shall see if he or me shall live for hunt again;—
Two seasons hath he baffled us, 'twere shame if still he may,
And I am sworn, and heed my oath, to end the toil to-day;
And Lauto, you shall stay behind—I would not have you drive;
If such the fears that fill your heart, the hunt can never thrive.”


VII.
“I'll go, my master,” cried the slave, with sorrow in his tone,
“If fears are in old Lauto's heart, they're fears for you alone;
Here, Willow, Wand, and Wallow!”—three dogs of famous breed,
That had a boast from Rollo's pack, the Norman's, to be seed:—
He sounded then most cheerily, that aged slave, and cried,
'Till, from the kennel, all the pack, came bounding to his side;
He took the route his master bade, and with a heavy heart,
That shook with fears he could not name, did Lauto then depart.


VIII.
'Twas standing in a cypress grove, that, by the Ocketee,
Kept crowding shadows that forbade the searching eye to see,
Young Kedar waited long to hear the music of the hounds,
That told the hunt was up, and fill'd the wood with cheering sounds;
No sound he heard, yet, on his sight, that one-horn'd deer arose,
As speeding on, he left behind, in secret, all his foes:—
“But me he shall not baffle thus,” cried Kedar as he came—
And lifting up his rifle then, he stood with ready aim.


IX.
Three strides the buck hath taken, his single horn on high,
And then he stay'd his forward flight, and look'd with steady eye;
He look'd upon the cypress grove where Kedar watching stood,
Then, turning, took his easy way toward the distant wood.
This madden'd Kedar then to see, and to his steed he gave
Free rein and rashing spur, and went as if some devil drave;
With shriek and shout he bounded on, and wonder'd to behold
How easy was the gait he went, that deer, along the wold.


X.
And still nor horn nor hound he heard, and nothing did he see,
Save that one deer that, fleeing, seem'd as not to care to flee;
This vex'd young Kedar to behold—a madness fill'd his blood,
And shouting as he went, he flew, with fury through the wood;
He heeded not for stop or stay—he look'd not once behind,
His soul was in that fearful chase—his spirit on the wind;—
A twilight shade came o'er the earth, and through the wood a moan,
Yet nothing did he see or hear, but that one deer alone!


XI.
The cypress groves he leaves behind, where, with impatient heart,
Three goodly hours he watch'd that day, from all the rest apart;
The long pines gather round him now, and now the thicket stays,
Yet on, with headlong haste, he goes, through wild and rugged ways;—
The deer, still wiling as he wends, keeps ever in his sight,
Yet indirect his forward course, as careless still of flight;—
More furious grew that hunter then, to see his mocking pace,
And feel at last, his noble steed was failing in the race.


XII.
No warning sign like this he heeds, but with his oath in mind,
Young Kedar, in that keen pursuit, is striving with the wind;
The rowel tears his charger's flanks until they glisten red,
The thong now smites his burning sides and now his aching head;
Yet docile still, in all his pain, though fainting with the chase,
He strives, that noble beast, to keep, unfailing, in the race;
The madness grows in Kedar's soul, and blinds his thought and will,
Such madness as must vex the heart of him that's doom'd to ill.


XIII.
And he that has no eye to see his weary charger's pain,
As little heeds the baffling wood through which his feet must strain;
The giant pines have faded far—the knotted thicket shakes
Its purple berries round his brow at every bound he takes;
The swamp is nigh, the horse's hoofs in ooze are plashing fast,
God save him, if he mean to save—such chase can never last!
The river's edge is nigh, and dusk, its solemn shadows rise,
And what a heavy silence hangs and broods along the skies.


XIV.
Before him sleeps the sluggish swamp that never sees the day,
And through its bosom, bounding on, the deer still keeps his way;
Another leap he gains the stream—another effort more—
And deeply in the charger's flanks, the rashing rowel tore;—
A sound is in young Kedar's ears—his hounds are close behind—
And 'tis old Lauto's cry that cheers upon that sudden wind;—
A warning cry that vainly seeks to drive the spell away,
And check the fiend that lies in wait and hungers for his prey.


XV.
Mad shouts from Kedar answer'd then old Lauto's kindly cry,—
“Ha! ha! I have him now!” was still the hunter's wild reply;
“I have him now—that one-horn'd buck—our path lies fair and free,
He sinks—he can no farther run—he lies by yonder tree;—
Upon him, Cygnet!—he is ours—one goodly effort more,
By death and all the saints, he's mine!—ha! ha! our hunt is o'er!”
And still the noble steed obeys, and through the swamp he goes,—
The swamp is past, and, round his feet, the dark Che-che-see flows.


XVI.
The dark Che-che-see flows along, in tribute to the main,
But stops not Kedar's rash pursuit—he spurs his steed again;
And breathing hard, the patient steed now takes the gloomy stream,
While roll'd the thunder cloud above, and sunk the westering gleam.
Old Lauto reach'd the river's edge, with dim and straining eye,
And something like a struggling steed, a moment did he spy;
But soon the waters closed above—he look'd beyond, and there
Still went, a failing shadow now, with easy pace, the deer!

THE SHIP OF THE PALATINES.
THE tradition upon which the following legend is founded, is still, at the present day, somewhat current in the “Old North State.” Within the last twenty years, indeed, we have seen in the newspapers a statement of the reappearance of the spectre ship of the Palatines, “all-a-fire,” and have been edified with the affidavits of good citizens, so solemnly impressed with the truth of the apparition, that they have not scrupled to make oath to the fact before the magistrates. The tradition—it will hardly escape the literary reader—is somewhat like that upon which Dana founds his poem of the “Buccaneer;” but it is of simpler structure, and not the less suitable, perhaps, because of its simplicity, for metrical purposes. I have treated it according to the tradition, without seeking to graft upon it any of my own inventions.

A SHAFT of sudden light, as if a glance,
Shot from the fiery eyes of sinking day,
Lights the green edges of the western wave,
And purples it with beauty. Yet the sun
Now flames on Asian summits. Midnight sways
His abdicated realm upon our shores,
And his successor, the pursuing moon,
Hath vanish'd in his wake. A cloudy veil
Hangs o'er her mansion, and the twiring stars
Grow dim along her track. Once more that blaze,
A sulphury column o'er the midnight waste,
Darts upward and prolongs a fitful glow,
Leaping from wave to wave.
“A ship on fire, Crowd sail, and let us reach it!”
Thus the cry Ran through our vessel, and each straining eye,
Piercing the solid depth of dark between,
Beheld—through fancies that with quicken'd birth,
Peopled all the scene with persons at their need—
The wreck'd and perishing wretches,—the strong man,
And trembling woman, and unconscious child,
As, hanging o'er the eternal precipice,
They cried to Heaven for succor,—cried and sank!—
Preferring the sure sentence of the deep,
To that dread doom, that, darting on their steps,
With thousand forked, fiery tongues pursued!
One moment of deep terror!—but the hand
Touch'd not the cordage. The uplifted voice,
Of order, lapsed in silence. It was gone,
That sudden blaze, as suddenly; and night,
A vast and shapeless shadow, frown'd in place.
Yet was the semblance, to each eye that saw,
A burning vessel, a majestic barque,
Limm'd in consuming flame—erect, yet doom'd—
From gunwale up to top, from stem to stern,
In fiery lines articulate and clear,
Each spar, and shaft, and lineament a-blaze,
Glorious in ruin!
Thus, in western wilds,
The traveller, in belated journey, sees
A vision of destruction,—not like this
A vision only; but reality,
So wildly, terribly beautiful, as takes
Possession of all senses. The tall wood
Is traversed by a tempest of bright flame,
That, coursing far, on seraph wing, defies
Restraint; leaps up to the inflammable pine,
And fastens, like a tiger, on its heart.
The monarch tree, with sky achieving spire,
And limbs spread out like patriarchal arms,
Exchanging all its garniture of green,
Is clothed in fiercest crimson—kingly shroud
For more than kingly shape. The mighty shaft,
Consuming, yet unshrinking!—the broad limbs
Blazing, but still extended—while the vine,
Supported long on those paternal arms,
Crackles, and curls, and shrivels, in the flame,
Like cordage on the vessel lately gone.
There is a deep and serious faith in man,
Nursed in his secret soul, and strengthen'd there,
By numerous stern and solemn instances,
That finds a latent but close sympathy,
Betwixt his own and that mysterious world
To which our shadows hasten. Earth may cloud,
Not wholly darken, that superior light
Which burns within us. This, immortal hands
Trim nightly; and upon our startled ken,
Purged of its sullen and unfruitful humors,
Betray brief glimpses of the thing that was,
And thing that may be. Purposes of dread,
To us, obscure and wondrous—not for us
To fathom or examine—in HIS will,
Whose will is monarch over all that lives,
Life's single source and Sov'reign,—rise in forms
That soothe, or awe, or waken—shake with fright,
Or startle into meritorious deed
And righteous duty. Innocence o'erborne,
Finds succor when most fearful; wan Despair
Grows hopeful, though the gleam upon his eye,
That wins him, with new confidence, to life,
Be germined by the vaporous fogs that rise
From ancient charnels and forbidden graves,
Where rot the unknown race;—and crime that lurks,
Ever in dread, a thing of hate and fear,
Is dragg'd to make confession of his guilt
By some inexorable shade,—some shape—
That moves the unwitting tongue, the unwilling hand,
In inauspicious moment, to betray
The one dread secret. Murder will come out,
And find a voice, and challenge scrutiny,
Though seas roll o'er the victim, and long years
Brood o'er the terrible hour that saw the deed!
There is a wild tradition of these shores,
Still told by ancient men,—who, in such blaze
As that which lately dazzled and withdrew,
See but a phantom beacon, set by heaven,
To mark the period and the place of crime.
Familiar to their eyes that spectral light,
With each returning year; and learned scribes
Have set their hands and signets to the tale
In solemn record.
Once upon a time—
Thus runs the story—ere our fathers yet
Flung off the sway of British sov'reignty,
A little band of German Palatines,*
Having fond hopes from change—it may be, lured
By vague, wild dreams of freedom,—left their homes,
And charter'd a frail vessel, which they fill'd
With wives, and sons, and daughters,—all their wealth
Of family and treasure. But the last
They screen'd from curious eyes, and, meanly garb'd,
No other seem'd than helpless destitutes,
Bless'd if the pittance, needful for the day,
Were, by the hand of charity, bestowed.
Thus habited—thus lowly in the sight
Of strangers they embark'd. They cross'd the seas,—
God smiled upon their voyage, till the shores
Of Carolina, gathering on their gaze,
Rose up in welcome, on the ocean's marge.
Then joy was in their hearts. The smiling sun
Look'd on them from blue summits. Green, the groves
Woo'd them with promised shelter; while the fruits,—
Fragrant and purple, that, in southern lands,
Spring, undemanding labor, at the word
Of sweet and sovereign nature,—to their glance
Made all one Eden. Joy, in every heart,
Burst forth from tongue and eye;—and children all,
Thus gladden'd, they forgot the prudent cares
That garb'd them late in seeming poverty.
The peril of the seas was at an end—
Their world before them. They had homes to build,
And time was precious;—wherefore then delay?
They brought their stores to light. Their eager hands
Unveil'd their treasures. Little family gauds,
Of gold and jewels, hidden through the past,
Long centuries of danger and distress,
Display'd by happy hands—on heaving hearts,—
And cups of silver in more precious grasp
Of dearest children. Confident, at last,
Of fortune,—in the hope that, baffled long,
No more could be denied—they yielded them
To every sweet assurance.
“With the morn,”
Thus rang their eager voices in all ears,
With iteration fond, rehearsing hope,—
“Our feet shall tread these shores—our fingers pluck
Their fruits—our forms beneath yon sacred shade
Of forests, that have felt no hand but heaven's,
Catch precious dews of slumber. Heaven be praised,—
For its dear mercies—for this best of all!”
Thus, like fond children, full of fresh delights,
In little groups, they throng'd the vessel's deck,
Each glad with pleasant purposes—his toils,
His petty schemes of future happiness—
Where build, what plant, what hours to care devote,
And what to recreation—what the flowers
Of this new world;—and—these were maiden thoughts—
How sweet, when garlanded with blue and pink
The evening dance beneath the spreading oak,
Love darting keenest glances from the grove,
And, in its shadow, weaving subtlest charms
To soothe and still subdue half-willing hearts!
Thus dreaming each, with some particular joy
To feed on, as the soul's best nutriment,
They mused together; framing at the last,
For absent dear ones in the father-land,
Glowing dispatches, in whose bright details
Hopes in a moment grew to certainties—
With fond entreaties to the ancient sire,
And timorous grand-dame, doubtful of the seas,
To follow, and their forest-homes partake.
Noon pass'd, and evening came, and courtly night,
With all her proud, but pale patrician throng,
Sweet, but how stately! Lingering to the last,
While yet the shores lay visible to sight,
Our blue-eyed wanderers hung with eager eyes
Upon the yellow sands, the green-plumed pines,
Tall warriors, set as watchers on the deep,
In close array and serried rank and file.
But, with the darkness they withdrew—with hearts
How joyful—with a thousand hopes in one,
And that how full of child-significance,
In the one word—“To-morrow!”
But to them,
That morrow, with its wealth of promises,
Came never! Fatal was their sad mistake—
That vain display of treasure, shown to eyes
Which gloated, with an eager, fierce delight,
On the bright vision. In the master's heart
Rose up the hungry fiend of avarice;—
A greedy pang, a lust that had no fear,
Work'd fearfully within him. In his eyes
Glitter'd the secret thirst, that might have taught,
Meet prudence to his simple passengers,
Had they been vigilant watchers with their eyes,
Less greedy than their hearts. But they had grown
Suspicionless beneath prosperity;
Saw not the malice—had no instinct dread
Of that so sudden passion which should work,
Even in the moment of their sweetest hope,
For their destruction. From their eyes he shrank,
The master—sought his cabin—conn'd his charts—
Fled from temptation—but his brooding thought
Clung to the one possession. Through the day,
A single image glanced before his gaze,
Of all those golden spoils within his grasp,
Blinding and dazzling; baffling the better nature
Stifling the pleading conscience, and with iron,
Of heated avarice, searing Pity's eyes.
He had no other thought. Within his ears,
Ever a single voice was whispering—
So softly, so soliciting!—that said,—
“Midnight will hide the deed—an hour is all—
Wherefore thy terror—thou shouldst be a man,
And make thyself forever!”
'Twas enough!
The demon triumph'd. Then the master sought
His crew, and with like argument o'ercame
The germ of mercy in their stubborn souls.
They swore, with linkéd hands, a horrid oath,
Fidelity, in blood, to one another—
And hell,—and then they whisper'd o'er their plans
Of cruelty and safety. With the night,
When darkness fill'd the close abode where slept
Their wearied victims,—silently they stole,
Each to his hateful task. With stealthy care
The fatal knife was lifted o'er the breast
Of each strong sleeper. At a signal given,
They struck, and struck together,—but one blow—
And writhing, but scarce shrieking in his pain,
The sleeper slept forever. One hoarse cry,
Stifled in utterance,—one spasmodic fling
Of upward striving arms,—and all was hush'd
In burdensome silence;—so oppressive then,
That the fierce criminal, shuddering at his post,
Paused, hopeful, that his victim still might groan,
And half implored the mercy of the struggle,
That he might feel the deed was yet undone!
But brief cessation from their bloody toils
Claim'd terror. Conscience flung aside and hush'd—
Then follow'd the last dreadful sacrifice!—
Women and children—shrieking innocents,
Pleading and clinging to their murderers,
And wondering that the father came not nigh—
The husband, brother,—while the threat'ning blade,
Blood-dripping gleam'd above their dying eyes.
All perish'd—prayer and supplication vain—
Mammon to Moloch made his sacrifice,
And, elbow-deep in blood, the murderers,
Stood cowering within the darkness, half afraid,
Lest, through the hold, the innocent starry eyes
Summon'd to look by each escaping soul,
Might pierce, in passing, and lay bare the deed.
A moment, and in contemplation brief,
The criminals found resolve. With hurried toils,
They gather'd up the wealth, whose fatal lures,
Had won them to the guilt of bloody hands,
And, with their ill-got treasure made secure,
They hasten'd to their boats. But first, to hide
All traces of their footsteps and their crime,
They plied with busy care the blazing brand;
And in the bowels of the fated ship,
Left flaming torches. Speeding to the shore,
They watch'd the fierce destruction. From the hold,
Shot up, in thousand tongues and jets of fire,
The raging flames ascended. On the masts,
The deck, the gunwale, spars and sails, they seized,
With sudden fury. All a-blaze, the ship
Darted along the deep, a form complete,
Complex in lineament, but subtly wrought
In lines of blazing light. And thus she sped—
No wind impelling—close beside the shore,
Where stood the gasping criminals—their eyes,
Wide-staring on that wond'rous spectacle.
Thus, to and fro, the livelong night she went,
They watching still, incapable of flight.
By day, a charr'd and dismal skeleton,
She frown'd upon them, as, in restless drift,
She floated slowly by the yellow sands—
Now gone from sight, now suddenly, once more,
Gliding above the self-same dreary spot
Which saw the deed most dark and damnable!
All day, as by some awful spell enchain'd,
They linger'd by the shore. Now, in the wood,
Hiding their trembling forms—now, peering forth,
With the deceitful hope that, from their eyes,
The dreaded sight was gone,—beneath the wave,
Hiding their secret. But when night once more
Swept with starr'd train along the accustom'd march,
Again the spectre vessel heaves in sight;—
The bright flames darting upwards, spreading fast
O'er sails, spars, cordage! Blazing as before,
Yet unconsuming still, the phantom barque
Bears right for shore. Too terrible the sight
Upon the eyes of those most wretched men.
They fled,—and in the forest wilderness,
'Mongst beasts of prey, and tribes more savage still,
Buried their heads, their secret and their hopes—
Never their fears! Years, generations pass'd:—
The living are the dead! What fate befel
These hapless and still hopeless criminals,
The chronicles reveal not;—but the tale,
Still told by wise and venerable men,
Declared they went unpunish'd, save by God,—
And that the spectre vessel, still a-blaze,
Upon that fearful anniversary,
Appears with night, and still must re-appear,
Until, upon each man child, from the loins
Of those most bloody men, the avenger's hand
Hath fatally fallen,—when the spectre ship,
Her work complete, all blazing as she goes,
Shall lay her aching ribs in ocean's caves!

* So called, as they came from the Palatinate.
THE TRYST OF ACAYMA.

I.
FAIR 'fall the Indian maiden, who sits by yonder stream,
For, though her eyes are full of tears, she dreams a happy dream;
She waits Panaco's coming,—he left her for the shore,
Where, bursting through the Darien rocks, Atrato's waters roar;
A poison'd javelin fill'd his hand, a knife was by his side,
And countless were the valiant chiefs beneath his arm that died;—
A brave among the bravest, the first to lead was he,
When down the mountain warriors sped to meet the Caribbee.


II.
A fear is in Acayma's heart, and yet that heart is glad,
For, bless'd with brave Panaco's love, it could not well be sad;
Three moons ago he sought her tent,—“Where is the maid?” said he,
“I seek but one of all the tribe that wanders by the sea.”—
His eye is on Acayma,—she dares not look on high,
Though well she knows, that happy hour, she stands beneath his eye,—
His hand is on the maiden's hand,—she felt her bosom heave;—
He kept the willing heart and hand, she had no power to give.


III.
Twas by the rapids of the stream that down the mountain fell,
Just where Biloxi's iron head looks o'er Senonee's dell;
“I'll watch these babbling waters, and they shall speak for thee;”
The maiden cried,—“and tell me why thou lingerest by the sea;—
I know thou dost not love me.”—Then lightly did he reach,
And, sprinkling with the falling drops, he stay'd her idle speech;
Then laughing long, and looking back, he bounded down the steep,
And, in her very joy of heart, the maiden could but weep.


IV.
But weary grow the lengthening hours, and shadows of distress
Now haunt the heart, that, in its love, still finds its loneliness;
The tears of joy that fill'd her eye when first Panaco went,
Are dry—but down the silent rocks her gloomy glance is sent;
A thousand fears are in her thought—she plucks and rends the flowers,
And anxious looks, where, in the sky, a heavy tempest lowers;
Though none may better guide the bark or trim the sail than he,
Still swells within her heart the hope he be not on the sea.


V.
Too rash and too resolved his soul, too prone to rove afar,
To launch the boat, to lead the hunt, to urge the tribe to war;
She weeps to think, to meet her wish, and win her love, he speeds
Where yellow waters boil in rage among the cavern weeds:
He promised ere he left her, to bring for her that day,
The brightest pearl that ever slept 'neath the gulf of Urabay;
To rob the sea-maid of her shells, and from the snake-god's home,
Tear the green gem that lights his crest, and rend his crystal foam.*

* The tradition is, that there is a great sea-snake of the Gulf, which the Indians call the king-snake, or god-snake, whose head is one entire emerald which lights the ocean for many leagues; that he sleeps in a cavern of the purest crystal, which is beautiful, in fantastic forms, like the combing foam of the sea when petrified.

VI.
The noontide hour is going fast,—she lingers still and sighs,
For thicker yet the shadows crowd, and gather on her eyes;
A shadow o'er her spirit steals, more darkly, deeply dread,
Than that which closes now in storm above the mountain's head;
Yet watches she the falling wave, and, to her trembling ears,
A murmur, like an omen comes—what is it that she hears?
'Tis sure Panaco's voice,—but no!—ah, sweet, delusive dream,
'Twas but some loosen'd rock above that tumbled down the stream.


VII.
She knows not of her sorrow yet,—she chides at his delay;
Oh! would she thus reproach him, if she knew what made him stay?—
Could she dream that while she blamed him, he battled for his life,—
Could she see the Spanish foeman, and Panaco 'neath his knife?
Alas! for thee, Acayma,—what though thy lover swore,
He will not come to bless the now,—he lies by yonder shore;
And though thy tears were torrents, like those adown you glen,
They cannot move Panaco,—he will never come again.

VASCO NUNEZ;
OR THE PROPHECY OF THE ASTROLOGER.
A LEGEND OF DARIEN.
THE reader needs no information in respect to the renowned Vasco Nunez de Balboa, the discoverer of the Pacific, and one of the most noble of all the cavaliers that followed in the footsteps of Columbus and Hernan Cortes. Of the astrologer, Micer Codro, less is known; but the pathetic facts in his career, as far as we possess them, may be found in the pleasant and instructive volume of Irving, which he devotes to the companions of Columbus. The legend which follows supplies its own facts, and needs no further introduction.

I.
TRIUMPHANT on a peak of Darien,
The eagle conqueror that, in one bold flight,
Had scaled each high impediment of cloud,
And stood above the summits of the storm,—
Balboa,—on the topmost crag that crown'd
The narrow isthmus, which between two seas
Spread barrier walls, denying their embrace,—
Rose, silent, with his eye uplift to heaven,
A moment, as in prayer and thankfulness,
Then, hopefully, he cast his glance below,
And trembled in his rapture.
'Neath him roll'd
The broad Pacific, never yet before
Unveil'd to European! What were then
Th' emotions of that conqueror, in whose toils
Such courage, with such great endurance mix'd,
Were the best proofs of virtue. Who shall tell
The struggling, glad sensations of the soul,
So highly reaching, when,—to crown at last
The hope so fruitful in great enterprise,
And noble consummation—on his eyes
Burst forth that mighty prospect—that deep sea,
In the virginity of its pure waves,
Unrifled of a charm—for the first time
Won to a mortal's arms!—or, who conceive,
When on the summit of that isthmus throned,
Higher than sovereign, and on either hand
Ranged the two sister seas, for the first time
Given to each other; he, that gallant chief,
Most noble and most valiant of the sons
Spain sent on this great service, stood alone,
And look'd upon his conquest? Who shall tell
The melancholy pride of his great soul,
When the achievement, long withheld, and won
Only by toil at last—the fearless toil
Of true adventure and achievement great,
That greater grew from trial—was his own;
And, to a spirit as aspiring, he
Added a name and triumph, scarce below
That of the “Admiral,” who led the way,
First, in this path of glory!—
With glad eye,
And soaring sense, and spirit almost drunk,
In its excess of rapture, dumb he stood,
And gazed upon the waters. Were these, then,
The billows of that Indian sea, which clasps
In its capacious bosom, those broad isles
Of boundless, unimaginable wealth,
In gold and gems o'erflowing, locking in
The spices and the perfumes of the East—
The world of spoil, the field of enterprise,
Meet for that ocean chivalry, to whom
The sea and land, the wild, and wilder yet
The savages that sway them, have no bar?
Was this that glorious sea—or, prouder still,
Had fortune yielded to his daring aim
Some lonely, lock'd-up ocean of the wild,
Some savage realm of water, undisturb'd,
Save by the Indian's bark, when, at the dawn,
He plunges through its silvery depths, unscared,
For the pearl oyster, and at eve returns,
Laden and glutted with its precious spoils,
To his lone wigwam by the reedy shore?
Proud were the thoughts of that young conqueror,
But with a due humility, that taught
Meet homage to the Deity who gave
The genius for the conquest, and laid bare
The portals of the empire and the deep!
Tears glitter'd in his great eyes, while he gazed;
His gleaming sword was laid upon the heights,
And his strong hands uplifted; while his knees,
Taught by the gratitude swelling in his heart,
Bow'd at that primitive altar of the rock,
That glow'd in day's first sunshine. Thus, alone,
A moment, pray'd Balboa. No one shared
The spectacle that gladden'd his fond eyes,
Or felt the secret sentiment of pride
That in his heart taught worship—till he bade
The host ascend the summits which his feet
Had singly scaled, and gather at a glance,
The marvellous empire hidden in the waste,
Whose secrets thus were won.
They came, they saw;
Like him, the host sank prostrate on their knees,
While audible hearts of worship breathed in prayer,
And one strong shout from that fierce chivalry
Spoke all the dark devotion of their race,
As, at the bidding of their chief, the cross,
Hewn from the tallest pine, was lifted up,
A symbol of their service and their faith,
In triumph o'er their heads. Then every eye
Grew pregnant with its tears—some upward turn'd
To heaven in thanks and gladness—others again,
In wonder not to be appeased, and love,
That had its source in wonder and delight,
To the broad realm of ocean at their feet.


II.
'Twas midnight, and the stars were in the heavens,
Each the proud centre of a countless host,
Each with a world of glory in its glance
Such as the orient knows not. Not a cloud
Dull'd their profusion; and upon that sea,
Soft, with a billowy rising, and a swell,
Like the voluptuous heavings, in the breast
Of some warm princess of the passionate East,
They flung their emulous and repeated lights,
With a most profligate glory. From the south,
Where, all day, it had wander'd seeking flowers,
And whence, with wing embarrass'd still with spoil,
It came diffusing odor, stole the wind,—
That robber of the close that feeds the waste,
And stirr'd with gentlest ripplings the great sea,
Until, with musical murmurs to the shore,
It roll'd its little billows to the reeds,
That straightway took a voice most like their own,
And join'd the natural concert;—sweet, sad tones,
The music of that spirit whose brooding wing
Ever gives tone to earth's vast provinces,
Her seas, and sloping shores, and the great heights,
Her mountains, vast world-citadels, that need
The blue wings of such spirit to subdue
Their rudeness, and such voices as it knows,
To harmonize, and with due sympathies,
Blend meetly, the wild aspect of the crag
With valleys, and the swelling tides of sea!
'Twas midnight, but the chieftain did not sleep!
Still, as he lay upon the summit crag,
Glided on the gradual hosts of starry eyes,
Sweet smiling in his own; and to his ear,
Still upward rose those voices of the wave,
Bidding him welcome; and around the heights,
With song of winds in commerce with the pines,
Such music of the wilderness as best
Persuades the sense to rapture, while the dream
Finds ever a shape of beauty for the eyes,
And still a ravishing feeling for the soul,
That sweetly takes possession of a thought,
Then wholly given to nature. There he lay,
Fond listening to those tones of land and sea,
With speech mysterious to the worshipping sea,—
Voices to voices calling, hill to hill,
And ocean to old forests, through still hours,
Keeping up a solemn chorus, and soft chant,
Such as soothes solitude on lonely heights,
And takes away the sorrow from the waste.


How could he sleep? The creature of his dreams,
That for so long had brought him wakeful hours,—
The vague conceit, the great expectancy,
The wondrous fond illusion, the wild hope,
The quenchless thirst, the matchless passion, all,
That show'd him ever glimpses of great heights
Attain'd, and empire won, and fame secure,
For the worshipping future,—all the dreams
That wrought his soul's ambition from the hour
He first had dream'd of glory,—were his own!—
The prize of a long dream was his at last!
The crown of a long strife was realized!
That hour had changed him, and possession won,
He was no more the creature he had been,
When boyhood was a season of delight,
And hope had many a semblance. When, amid
The festive throng, for mirth and music bent,
At evening by the waters, or attuned
To a more fell employment, he was found
Rashly adventurous, daring still the first,
Where all were daring—in the tented field,
Join'd in close combat with the tawny Moor,
A kingdom on his arm. The ruthless mood,
Indifferent to aught but valorous deed
And bloody retribution—all were gone!
And, in their stead, a loftier spirit came,
Keeping him watchful. His adventurous mind
Felt its own wing, and knew its strength at last
And soar'd into the heavens; and, eagle-like,
He brooded 'mong those mountains through the night,
And meditated, with the matin chime,
His flight across the waters;—where to lead
He knew not; but his dreams, his waking dreams,
Peopled the wilds beyond, with glorious forms
And empires of the sun. He too would give
To Castile and to Leon a new world;
And more than he, the mighty Genoese,
Another ocean with its tribute wealth,
And uncomplaining waters.
He would yield
His country such a treasure, and a realm,
Of such unbounded wealth and eminence
As should eclipse each jewel in her crown,
The gift of former sons. Thus mighty souls
Commune with their own purposes. Their pride,
That seeks the conquest, sees the hour beyond,
When, with a generous, free magnificence,
They fling the golden guerdon they have brought,
On shrines which still embody to their souls
A power for love and worship. Sovereigns thus
Find loyalty, faith, and sweet humility;
And beauty, the fond homage of a heart
That never dared to breathe its passionate love,
Yet yearn'd the while to bless and to endow.


Thus, on the rocks of Darien, lay the chief,
Brooding with sweet, proud fancies, while the stars
Lapsed overhead above, and still below
Lay his exhausted followers, wrapt in sleep,
That knew no dream like his. At last, a voice
Aroused him, and the weight of a strong hand,
But not in anger, on his shoulder fell.
He started from his trance. Beside him stood
One of the wise men of that dreaming age,
A fond, self-mortified spirit,—one who sought
Its thoughts in realms forbidden—an old man,
Whose spirit, through long abstinence and toil,
Deep study, musings vast and infinite,
And rigorous penance, in its age had grown
Familiar with the stars. To him they were
Not less than wizard lights, and presences,
Of soul and speech. To him they bared the seals
That held the future, and they laid the past
Before him as an open scroll, writ full
Of all familiar characters. Unveil'd to him,
All time grew present;—and, in rocky cells,
In ruin'd castles, and secluded caves,
By seas, in lonely forests, and afar
From human converse, still he conn'd the page,
Nightly, of mortal story. He could read
All futures. He could conjure shapes at will,
Into the speaker's presence;—so his fame
Ran 'mongst the Spanish host;—and such as he
Was ever sought and honor'd by the chief
That toil'd in wild adventure. Thus they made
Apparent, the large glory in their search;
Their wild, ambitious reachings, and the dream
That still ennobles conquest, with the thirst
For something, which the world may not bestow.
Such was the aged man, who, on that night,
Stood by the musing conqueror, as he lay
Upon the mountain peak of Darien.
He rose, and they together look'd below,
Where, flashing ever out beneath the stars,
Gleam'd the calm waters, the Pacific plain,
Repeating all the glories in the heavens.
Thus look'd they both in silence for awhile,
Till the young chief, with gladness in his tones,
Cried to the aged man:
“Hast thou no voice,
My father, for this triumph? Here, at last,
We have laid bare the secret of the West,—
New worlds,—new oceans,—people—countless lands,
And empires yet to win. What toil was ours!
Yet vainly have these perilous heights and wilds
Opposed us in our march—vainly our fears,
Striven to retard—vainly these barbarous tribes
Raised their red spears, or hurl'd their feathery shafts.
These have we overcome, and Balboa now
May vaunt his conquests on the kindred page
That glows with Colon's glory. Have I not
Given a new ocean to our sovereign's rule,
A tributary world, a myriad race
Of subjects, and a vast and nameless wealth,
Not to be number'd? Have I not outspread
Here, to the embraces of a foreign breeze,
That blossoms in its odor, borne afar,
Doubtless, from gardens of the orient realm,
Hard by to Ophir—his unconquer'd flag;
And, on this rock, beheld from either sea,
Planted the sacred standard of our faith,
The hallow'd cross; in token that the wild
Is now the care of Christ, henceforth to be
The creature of his people? These are deeds,
Good father, that shall never be forgot;
And Balboa's name, when he shall be no more,
Shall have its chronicler to spell the ear,
And on the lips of story sound as well,
As any in the record. How will 't read,
With “Vasco Nunez de Balboa,” to write
“Colon the Admiral”—“world-finders both:””


The Magian paused a space, and to his eye—
Where brightness, strangely mingled up with gloom,
Wore an appalling lustre, not unlike
Such as our dreams for spirit forms provide—
A darker shade, a deeper, sadder hue,
And, it might be, a large but single tear,
Gather'd unbidden. Calmly then he spoke.


“My son, at Palos, by the convent walls
Of La Rabida, your old mother dwells:
I saw her, when we last departed thence,
On this adventure. Not to me unknown,
The future, as you found it. You were then,
Already, known to glory—so men call
Words from their fellow-men—and 'twas her pride
To speak of you as all the country spake.
I could not check the current of her speech,
Nor were it kind to do so; but, aroused,
And ravish'd with the subject, when she grew
Wild with imagined triumphs and great spoils,
And all the gauds of fortune—in my heart
I sorrow'd for her strange simplicity.
I did not tell her that her eyes in vain
Would, till the sunset, o'er the waves look out
For her son's caravel. I did not say,
What, well persuaded, I might well have said,
That all your triumphs were to end at last
In a base dungeon and a bloody grave,
And ignominious scaffold—
“Ah! you start!
But 'tis my grief, as 'tis thy destiny,
That I should mourn for that I must foresee,
And thou escape not. Hearken, then, awhile,
Thou wilt remember, on our voyage out,
I traced thy fortune. Thou didst seek of me
Its features; but thy quest I still withstood,
As aiding not thy service to be known,
And, haply, moving thy too soaring thought,
Too much to dwell upon it. But with me
It grew a settled study. From my art—
Of which in praise I speak not, when I say
It has not fail'd me oft—I linger'd o'er
Thy varying fortunes. Every step thou took'st,
Whether in peace or war, in court or camp,
In ease or peril, I beheld at large.
I saw thee trace thy journey to the wild—
Thy each reverse—thy final, full success,
Until the mighty waters, which now roll
Incessant to our feet, proclaim'd thy fame;
And to the daring soldier gave the praise
Of calm forethought, deliberation wise,
And an intelligent sense that all confirms
In this thy conquest. Here then are we now—
So far, the fortune I have traced is true!”


“What more, what more?” impatient, then, the chief
Ask'd of the aged man. “Let me know all—
I do esteem thy art, and well believe
Thou lovest me as thy son. Thou wilt not speak
What 'twere not well to hear; and well I know,
Thy wisdom, if ill fortune do betide,
May guide my wilder'd bark, and bring it safe.
Speak then at once, nor think that at thy speech,
Though fearful be its form, my soul shall quake,
Or my knees tremble. Let me know it all,
That I may battle boldly with my fate,
However vain the struggle, as becomes
A son of Spain, a warrior of the wild,
A spirit prone to combat with the seas,
And brave them at their wildest. Speak, old man;
Give thy thought words, and let my fortune stand
Before me on the instant.”


The magian spoke:
“When in the gather'd stars thy fate I read,
In one remote and solitary light,
I saw its bane, and baleful influence.
A single star, thus quarter'd in the heavens.
Teem'd with malicious auguries, and shook
All fires malign upon thee. It was then
I sought its secret power, and early read,
That, while afar, in the extremest east,
It kept its foreign station, thou wert safe;
But when, with daring wing, it took its way,
And, where the evening hangs her golden lamp
O'er the sun's chambers, shook its lurid fires,
That hour to thee was perilously dark,
And death, a bloody, ignominious death,
Was gather'd in its verge. That hour's at hand!—
Look forth into the west. Behold, apart,
From all communion with its fellow lights,
Where, with audacious blaze and angry beam,
That fate casts forth its fires. Redly it burns,
And, as exulting in the near approach
To the destruction of its victim, takes
A subtle halo round it. There are stars,
That to the eye of mortals seem but stars,
Yet are they evil spirits. Such is this.
They are not of the class with which they roam,
Their lights are not like those which burn around,
Nor have they the like genial influence;
They hold a fearful power o'er earthly things,
Man, and the worlds about him. O'er the earth,
And on the waters, they still exercise;
They have their moods, and, bitterly at war
With all God's works, they seek for their annoy;
Impede their fortunes, or attend them on,
Even to success, as, with thee, this hath done,
That, when they hurl them down to the abyss,
The height shall be a perilous one they leave.
The gentler lights of heavenly providence
Shrink from their foul contagion, till they stand
Apart, and from the rest all separate.
Some they precipitate from their high spheres,
Leaping into their places; the dethroned,
Extinguish'd in the deeps of all their light,
Find there a dwelling-place, to their new life
More apt and fitting. Such powers have these
O'er men and stars, as these do err and shoot,
Out from their proper places. Over thee
Yon planet hangs its spell, and thou art mark'd
Its victim, surely—all thy triumph naught—
Thy spoils for other spoilers, and thy deeds
Naught valued, nothing doing for thy life,
But all against thee. Jesu be thy shield!”


Brief was the respite;—a short season pass'd,
The omen was complete;—the augury
Had its fulfilment! He who, at that hour,
Beheld himself—by all the world beheld—
Successful—born for conquest and renown,—
Died on the block; the moral rounded well
To closing of a mighty history,
Such as too commonly sculptures mortal glory,
Where Shame sits watchful how to mock the triumph,
And Hate despoils the conqueror! In the grasp,
The full possession of his matchless heights,
The power pass'd from him to his enemy's hands;
And he who built the altar, was the first
To shed his blood on it in sacrifice,
Yet hopeless of atonement. The base spirit
Triumph'd above the noble; as the viper
Crawls to the bosom of the sleeping lion,
And stings him where he lies. Thus overcome,
Among his foes at Acla, Balboa died,
A hero's glory and a felon's doom
Closing a perilous life of many toils
And true adventure. The magician's speech
Was sooth—and he, whom worlds could not contain,
So vast his spirit—whose far-darting soul
Saw, from its skyey pinnacle, the new
And boundless shores he conquer'd—he, the brave—
The noblest in renown, where all were brave—
Perish'd, unheard, unheeded—not an eye
To weep his fortunes; not a single arm
To do his nature justice, and redress
The wrongs of men and nations. Thus he died—
The world he conquer'd yielding him—a grave.


THE SIOUX BOY;
AN INDIAN LEGEND.

DEEP hidden in the forest wild,
Where yet the savage wander'd free,
A manly Sioux Boy beguiled
The hours beneath a tree;
And gayly, in his native tongue,
Mix'd lay of love and war he sung.


Yet, to himself, for none were near,
Nor chief, nor maid, to list the strain,
And, save mine own, no other ear
Might know his pride or pain.
Yet, subject to his secret thought,
This ditty for himself he wrought.


“O! soon upon the Pawnee's trail,
Sweet Manné, will thy Ontwa go;
And I shall hear his woman wail,
And meetly use the bended bow,
And hurl the spear, and bare the knife,
And win, or lose, the forfeit life.


“I glad me that the time is come
To win among the tribe a name,
And, in thy tent, no longer dumb,
To tell thee of my flame;
How much I'll love,—how bravely do,
To teach thee how to love me too.


“I'll make thy home of sheltering reeds,
And store it with each forest prize;
For thee, the red deer bounds and bleeds;
For thee, the spotted panther dies;
Soft furs shall frame thy couch by night,
And gentlest steeds shall bear thy flight.


“Oh, 'mongst our people thou shalt be
Made glorious by thy Ontwa's love;
I'll triumph in the fight for thee,
And win the spoils of field and grove;
And when they see how brave my hand,
They'll make me leader of the band.


“There shall be songs in other days,
Of what thy Ontwa's strength hath done,
And chiefs to come shall speak with praise,
Of scalp-locks from the Pawnee won;
And they shall tell of thee, as blest,
The young fawn at the warrior's breast.


“ 'Neath summer sky, o'er sunny plain,
Together, fearless, shall we speed:
I'll house thee from the winter rain,
In spring to pleasant pastures lead;
And thou shalt see me, with the bow,
Pursue, and slay the buffalo,


“And bring thee from the morning chase,
Unhurt, the meek and spotty fawn;
And proudly at thy feet I'll place,
The skin from panther drawn;
Torn from him with a warrior's art,
While yet the life is at his heart.


“And thou shalt shape the moccasin,
And well repay thy warrior's deeds,
When thou shalt work the red deer's skin,
Gay with thy many color'd beads,
Meet for a chief, when at our home
An hundred braves his guests become.”


Thus mused the boy beneath his tree,
Of love's delights, and warrior's pride,
A long and gladsome reverie,
Where he the chief, and she the bride,
Swept through the sylvan future still,
A realm of love, and free from ill.


With very joy at last he slept,—
He dream'd of bliss, and had no fear
That nigh the hateful Pawnee crept,
Like serpent, close beside his ear;
He wakens only into life
To feel within his heart the knife!


One moment's consciousness he knew,
Before the fatal blow was sped;
The red blade flashes on his view,
He feels it circling round his head;
And dies;—his fancy not more sooth
Than that which cheats the white man's youth.


THE SYREN OF TSELICA;
A TRADITION OF THE FRENCH BROAD.
THE tradition of the Cherokees asserts the existence of a Syren, in the French Broad, who implores the Hunter to the stream, and strangles him in her embrace, or so infects him with some mortal disease, that he invariably perishes. The story, stripped of all poetry, would seem to be that of a youth, who, overcome with fatigue and heat together, sought the cool waters of the river, and was seized with cramp or spasms; or, too much exhausted for reaction, sunk under the shock. It does not much concern us, however, what degree of faith is due to the tradition. Enough that such exists, and that its locality is one of the most magnificent regions, for its scenery, in the known world. Tselica is the Indian name of the river.


'TWAS in summer prime, the noontide hour,
Sleep lay heavy o'er the sunny vale;
Droop'd the sad leaves 'neath the fiery vapor,
Droop'd and panted for the evening gale.


Gloomy, lonely, and with travail weary,
Down the mountain slopes the stranger came;
Droop'd his eyes, and in his fainting bosom
Lay the pulsing blood, a lake of flame.


Oh, how cool in sight the rushing river,
With its thousand barrier-rocks at strife,
All its billows tossing high their foam wreaths,
As if maddening with the impatient life.


Wild, with ceaseless shout they hurried onward,
Laughing ever with their cheerful glee,
O'er the antique rocks their great limbs flinging,
With a frantic joy was strange to see.


They, of all, possess'd the life and action,
Silence else had sovereign sway alone,
All the woods were hush'd, and the gray mountain
Look'd with stony eyes from crumbling throne.


Sad the youth sank down in the great shadows,
Close beside the waters as they ran,
Very hopeless was he of his travail,
Very weary since it first began.


Friends and fortune he had none to cheer him,
And the growing sorrow at his heart
Wrought the bitter thought to bitter feeling,
And he yearn'd to perish and depart.


“Why,” he murmurs, “still in toil unresting,
Should I strive for aye in fruitless strife;
Where the hopes and loves that used to glad me,
When I first began the race of life?


“Where's the pride of triumph that was promised,
That should crown me with the immortal wreath;
Where the fond heart that in youth embraced me—
Gone, forever gone—and where is Death?


“Give me peace, ye skies and rocks: ye waters,
Peace yourselves ye know not, but your flow
Tells of calm and rest beneath your billows—
Coolness, for the fiery griefs I know.”


Thus, with languid soul beside the river,
Gazed he sadly as that hour he lay;
Gloomy with the past, and of the future
Hopeless,—hence his guilty prayer that day.


Brooding thus, and weary, a song rises,
From the very billows, soft and clear;
Such as evening bird, with parting ditty,
Pours at twilight to the floweret's ear.


Wild and sweet, and passionate and tender;
Now full, now faint; with such a touching art,
His soul dissolves in weakness, and his spirit
Goes with the throbbing sweetness at his heart.


He looks with strain'd eyes at the lapsing waters,
And gleaming bright beneath the billows, lo!
Flashes white arms, and glides a lovely damsel,
Bright eyes, dark locks, and bosom white as snow.


He sees, but still in moment glimpses only,
Gleams of strange beauty, from an eye all bright,—
As when some single star, at midnight, flashes
From the cold cloud, above the mountain's height.


As raven black as night float free her tresses,
Outflung above the waves by snowy arms,
Now o'er her bosom spread, and half betraying,
While half concealing still her sunny charms.


And then again ascends her song of pleading—
“Ah, but thou failest with the noonday heat,
Thy brow is pale with care, thine eyelids drooping,
Thy soul is sad, and weary-worn thy feet.


“Oh! come to me, and taste my waves of cooling;
I'll soothe thy sorrows; I will bring thee rest;
Thy fainting limbs grow strong in my embraces,
Thy burning cheek find pillow on my breast.


“Oh! come to me!” was still the loving burden,
With charm of such a sweetness in its swell,
That every fancy in his bosom kindled,
And every feeling woke to work the spell.


Wild was the dreamy passion that possess'd him;
Won by the syren song, and glimpsing charms,
He leapt to join her in the wave, but shudder'd
At the first foldings of her death-cold arms.


Fiercely against her own she press'd his bosom;—
'Tis the ice-mountain whose embrace he feels;
Within his eyes she shot her dazzling glances:
'Tis Death's own stony stare the look reveals.


He breaks away, the shore in horror seeking;
But all too late,—the doom is in his heart:
He sinks beside the fatal stream, and dying,
Deplores the prayer that pleaded to depart.


His dying sense still hears the fatal Syren;
She sings her triumph now, her love no more:
A fearful hate was in the eldritch music,
And terror now, where beauty sway'd before.


No more the pleasing wile, the plaintive ditty:
He strives in vain the wizard strain to flee;
“Death,” ran the song,—no more of peace and pity,
“To him who madly seeks embrace with me!”


THE CITY OF THE SILENT.*
* Delivered at the Dedication of the Grounds of Magnolia Cemetery, near the city of Charleston, on the 19th day of November, 1850.

WHEN, in the twilight hour and pensive mood,
Thought seeks repose, and Passion sleeps subdued,
Why doth the eye with mournful fondness rest,
On the dark shadows gathering in the west?
Why doth the soul delight to follow fast,
O'er that dim realm from which the sun hath pass'd?
No more his smiles persuade the upward eye,
No more his glories gladden in the sky;
The rainbow tints, the children of his beams,
Dear to our sight as music to our dreams,
That hung around, pavilioning his throne
With hues and gleams more lovely than his own,—
That closed his eyes, that caught their dying sign,
And soothed, with office sweet, his sad decline,—
Themselves, in shadowy folds of cloud and dun,
Depart, like mourners, following still the sun;
Forego the glorious empire which, awhile,
Glow'd in the sweetness of his dying smile,
And all their happy heritage of light
Yield to dusk eve and pall-enshrouding night.


Yet, still we gaze,—and, through the gloomy waste,
Pore, with fond search, for all the realm they graced;
Our living cares and purposes forgot,
Our wealth unvalued, or remember'd not,
Why do we thus, with eager vision strain,
And strive with thoughts themselves that strive in vain?
Why grasp at each bright mirage that no more
Can cheer the fancy which it charm'd before?


'Tis that an image from the heart is cast,
That shows how rich our empire in the past!
There, twins of rapture, Hope and Memory strive
Our skies to brighten, and our joys revive;
These, when the clouds about our vision roll,
Bestow the beauteous prospect on the soul,—
There still we grasp the beings loved and lost,
There shield our flowers, uninjured, from the frost,—
There shrine each feature in whose smile we felt
The fancies kindle, and the feelings melt,
The hope grow warm, the impulsive passion rise
That caught its sunlight from the loved-one's eyes,—
And still, in dreamy consciousness of bliss,
Feel Love's last hour of rapture sweetening this.
Thus link we still, with shadows that depart,
Dear aspects always shining in the heart,
Soothe the keen sorrow which their loss deplores,
By fondest search through memory's haunted stores,—
By dreams, that freshen to the soul, by night,
What day and care would ever take from sight.
These paint them, sweet and smiling as of yore,
And all the virtues teach they taught before;
Their forms unseen, with memory's help we trace,
Still fresh, the beauties of each well-known face,
The genial blessings which their presence brought,
And all the dear delights they yielded thought;—
Thus do they soothe the pangs their parting gave,
And, through their memories, gladden from the grave,
Even as the flowers their odors still unfold,
Where long before they perish'd, through the mould;—
Thus still they bloom around the silent hearth,
Thus make a sacred altar-place of earth,
Thus help us shrine the dear ones pass'd from day,
And catch their smiles long after their decay.


The thoughtful wanderer thus, while musing lone,
O'er realms whose ruins speak for empires gone,
With reverent search the temple still explores,
Copan re-peoples, and Palenque restores;
Bends, in mute homage, at each mouldering shrine,
And broods o'er altars once believed divine!—
No sun-shaft kindles now the sacred height,
Where spake the Prophet once in words of might;
No holy chant ascends from virgin choirs,
From golden censer, now, no cloud aspires;
The song is hush'd—the prayer is dumb,—and still
That heart whose humbler faith survived its will;
No passion strives, no virtue lifts its eye,
And all is fled that might have told us why!
Silence, alone, with finger on cold lips,
But shows the nation through its drear eclipse,—
Eclipse that smote, with power decreed to crush,
Pride's mighty heart, and all its voices hush!
Vainly the Pilgrim, from the Past implores
The curious legend of these speechless shores,
What races fill'd their cities,—what the Fate,
That found them weak, and left them desolate?—
What deeds were theirs—what mighty works they wrought?
What Faith they cherish'd?—what their toils of Thought?
From the bleak ruin comes no answering tone:
Realms of the silent! still they sleep unknown!


Yet, not the less, with reverent awe we glide
Through each dark portal, once of power and pride;
A human sense and sympathy, with spell
Of thought and worship still, the soul compel:
With what a speech these crumbling piles declare,
How stern the rule,—the realm how rich and fair!—
What various fortunes sped their march of state,—
How Wealth grew prodigal and Genius great;
What ages pass'd, of virtues crown'd with sway,
How slow their steps from conquest to decay;
How subtly stole the conqueror on their sleep—
Their dream how soothing, and their doom how deep!
Here man hath been Heaven's minister—and foe!
Hath felt, like us, the tides of joy and woe;
Hath, like our living races, known his hour
Of hope and triumph, and strode on to power;
In fond fruition of each earthly bliss,
Hath found his sole sufficient world in this;
Scorn'd the sage counsels of the reverend sire
That taught the moderate aim and meet desire,
Defied the seer who show'd the scourge and yoke,
Nor fear'd the danger, till he felt the stroke;
In pride of place hath mock'd the blessings given,
And lost Earth's gifts, despising those of Heaven!


In these memorials, silent though they stand,
We read the dangers of each living land;
They teach the moral to our shrinking hearts,
That, with our virtue's loss, our strength departs;
That the proud empire, wallowing still in crime,
Must lose, at last, the power to cope with Time;
Must drink the dregs of bitterness and blight,
And veil its glories all in gloom and night!


'Tis even for this, with reverent sense we tread
These silent dwellings of the unknown dead;
'Tis that the echo from their lonely towers,
Speaks for the fate that yet may fall on ours;
Recalls such histories as we feel our own,
And shows the skeleton behind the throne!—
Their homes are ruins, but they once were bright,
With living beauty bursting on the sight;
Here, in the dance, while music gush'd in air,
Swam the gay groups insensible to care;
These groves, now silent, heard each whispering voice,
Whose low fond accents bade some heart rejoice;
And song, that seem'd to bring the heaven it sought,
Was here to soothe the wearied brain of Thought!
The purple trophies of their golden state,
'Tis ours, in fancy, thus to re-create;
Evoke their hero-aspects, chiefs of fame,
And point old morals with each new-born name;
Their Bards arouse,—their Sages,—as they speak,
With voices wise and powerful, like the Greek,
And strain all senses, gazing into night,
Still, for the glorious phantoms gone from sight!


Yes! here they toil'd—here triumph'd—here they won
A glorious height of empire like the sun,
Here set, like him, in clouds—perchance, to rise,
With him, triumphant still, in other skies!
Even through the shroud about their empire cast,
We catch faint glimpses of their wondrous past;
The spirit of ancient days, if good or great,
Gilds even the ruins of its former state;
With pleasing sadness we explore each shrine
Our kindred races once esteem'd divine;
The horizon dark, still keeps some sacred gleams
That all our living instinct crowds with dreams,—
Dreams that to human consciousness appeal,
And teach those truths Time never can reveal!
Here, living, breathing, burning souls, in strife
That led to mightiest conquests, sprang to life,
With fierce ambition pluck'd the crown of Fame,
And left a monument, without a name!—
Their altars sacred, though obscure their faith,
Their labors living, though themselves in death,
We bend in awe beneath each mournful shade,
And yield our worship where the God hath sway'd.
We know their might, their faith, the soul, the will,
In the great shrines their Fate hath left us still.
These were their temples,—noble, vast, and high,—
They honor'd thus no lowly Deity!
For sure, the ambition which can nobly raise,
Must crave a sovereign worthy all its praise,
And each conception greatly born of Thought,
Finds still a kindred God for him who wrought.
The grand achievement thus declares a flight,
That seeks its ideal on the loftiest height,
And where, of worship, it avows the need,
Demands a God superior to its deed.
Thus the Egyptian Magian, working well
To make his temples grand and durable,
With sleepless aim and subtle hope aspires
To a far future worthy such desires,
And taught his soul, with eager sense, to lift
The wing and eye to her immortal gift!
So the Athenian, exquisite in taste,
In wisdom strong, in great conception chaste,
Still felt that earth was not alone the sphere
To his soul's want compatible and dear.
Each virtue found its God, each fancy grace,
Each Deity his fitting shrine and place:
But one was wanting yet, superior still
To all that soothed his sense, or sway'd his will:
His mind, unsatisfied by all below.
He raised one shrine to HIM he did not know;*
Taught by etherial Plato still to crave,
That hope, o'er all, which soars but from the grave.

*Acts xvii. 23: “To the unknown God.”

The vast but ruin'd piles of these unknown,
Demand meet temples for the state and throne;
And not in vain our search—around us start
The halls of learning, and the homes of art.
This was the Senate House—the Forum there,
Where plebeian thousands came to feel and hear;
And still, on fancy's ear, the living swell
Of eloquence, omnipotent to spell,
Shakes with electric fires that thrill and dart,
With seraph-mission, through the nation's heart.
With patriot prescience it declares the fate—
That last, perchance, which left them desolate!—
Still summoning up, the State to save at last,
All that was glorious in the grateful Past!—
Their prophets well foresaw the approaching storm,
And bade their revels cease, their warriors arm;
Show'd the dark speck, no larger than a hand,
Destined to shroud in blackness all the land,
Yet show'd in vain;—Cassandra-like, decreed
To speak the truth, with none the truth to heed:
They danced, they slept—untimely slept—and woke
To feel the ruin, and to wear the yoke,
To fly their homes, to crouch in them as slaves,
Or find—last hope of freemen—freemen's graves!


The truth that teaches nothing of the race,
Which, in its ruins, shows how proud its place,—
That writes no record on its mighty towers,
At least assures us of a life like ours:—
Shows us the very yearnings that we know,
Still to achieve, and leave a name below:
A fond ambition, struggling 'gainst decay,
To wrench from Time the sceptre of his sway,
Still to assert, though we no more may see,
O'er future souls, the soul's proud sovereignty,
To challenge worship, though our sun be set,
And win that homage that pursues us yet!


Thus build we shrines of marble—towers, whose height
Declare our pride of aim and people's might,
Rear temples, columns, and inscribe on each,
Names that shall yet lend eloquence to speech,
And life to language,—with a voice sublime,
Pealing, through wrecks of years, o'er tracts of Time!
All nations feel this yearning—thus they raise
The tower and tomb for future love and praise,
Heedful of memories that shall fondly keep
A filial watch o'er their ancestral sleep,
Recall each virtue precious as their own,
And make with pride the sire's great actions known.


That fond solicitude that makes them strive
Their names and triumphs thus to keep alive,
Moves still a care more sacred, at the close,
Which shrines their ashes in supreme repose.
The frail, decaying form which once enshrined
The immortal spirit, the imperial mind,
Thus, by its trust, made sacred, too, we store
As the dear casket which the jewel bore:—
Not worthless now, because no more we hear
Its voice of soul and sweetness on the ear;
Not honor'd less, because no more our sight
Glows in the beauty of its kindred light;—
But cherish'd still, and treasured to the last,
For its dear memories in the haunted past.


With eyes that weep to see, yet weep to lose,
We yield the loved one to his long repose;
With reverent hands the kindred dust we bear,
To sacred shadows of the wood repair,
Far from the crowded mart, the world whose strife
Still mocks at death, and seldom honors life,
There lay we down the form that cannot know
How fond our homage, and how great our woe.
With tender love,—with tearful eyes,—we trace
For his last dwelling some selected place,
Some shady copse, or isle—some spot of green,
By oak and elm secure with leafy screen;
Where the Magnolia towers—where tribute vines
Steal up to clamber o'er supporting pines;—
Some spot most precious to the musing hour
Of him whose relics cold we thus embower;—
Some sunny bank, whence, gazing on the west,
His living eye with all the landscape blest,
It was his wont, from friendship still to crave,
The spot he couch'd on might be made his grave;—
A spot to heart subdued, and cheer'd by faith,
To make the spirit half “in love with death,”—
Peace in the prospect, peace upon the sea,
And sunny smiles about each guardian tree,
No voice of man to vex the solitude,
But breezes softly whispering through the wood.


The filial love that honors thus the dead,
And shrines the form from which the soul hath fled,
Wide as the world, and various as the race,
Howe'er remote the time, or far the place,
Alike in all, acknowledges the same,
How dear to love the loved-one's precious frame;—
How dear to pride the ashes once so bright,
With all that hope could warm, or joy delight.—
To natural instincts true, the heart requires
Meet shrines and emblems for departed sires;
Feels well the alliance 'twixt the soul and clay,
That makes us shrink to see the last decay,—
Moves us to cherish the delusive thought,
That, with the one, the other still is fraught—
That, of the living spirit, lately ours,
With sense so keen, and will of wondrous powers,
So quick to feel and glow, so prompt to hear
Love's wooing accent, and bewitching prayer,—
All is not lost, and we shall yet behold
The form arise, the eye grow bright and bold,
The soul return and fold its wandering wing,
And the cold arms embrace us while we cling.


Even with such dream, so vague but precious still,
The ancients honor'd death with pomp and skill,
Forgot no rite to pride or worship dear,
And spread meet flowers and emblems on the bier;
Bade music sound, with dirge-becoming woe,
And lighten'd Death's sad brow with state and show;
The grave became a temple, grand in gloom,
And lamps sepulchral shone within the tomb,
Symbols of that pure element of light
That Earth may dim, but not extinguish quite!
Back, through the vista of five thousand years,
How simply sad each varied rite appears;
How strangely same, yet multiplied, the plan
Which shrined and honor'd the remains of man!
The Egyptian rear'd his pyramid, which shows
At once his monarch's pride, and people's woes;
With precious unguents pluck'd from Time his prey,
And kept the loved-one's features from decay;
Through plates of glass the unconscious visage show'd,
And framed, in mightiest cells, the last abode;
Circled the sleeper with the pomps of art,
Dear to his fame, or grateful to his heart:
Thus, o'er the gloomy walls, the painter spread
The storied progress of the conqueror-dead;
Each great achievement of his pride or might,
His towers of state, his triumphs won in fight;
How, with keen lust, he tore, with savage hand,
His bloody trophies from each neighboring land;
What myriads march'd to swell his despot train,
What nations battled, and what hosts were slain!
Lofty in chariot, arm'd with wrath, we see
His onward stride to death or victory;
Trace him, with Fire and Famine in his wake,
Through the red surges which his battles make;
Behold the tower go down, the city flame,
And join the rabble shout that calls it fame;
For one wild moment, reckless still of life,
Share in the wild delirium of the strife;
The rush of steeds, the wreck of spears, the dread
Lock of the victor-living with the dead!
So well, portraying all the powers of ill,
The servile painter shows the courtier's skill;
Enslaved by power, and scarcely true to art,
Heedless of all that's precious to the heart,
On brows of Guilt, the laurel crown bestows,
And makes us glory still in human woes;
These, following fast upon his march appear,
But neither wake the pang, nor force the tear;
Though, in procession sad, the captive crowd
Leash'd at his heels, still cry their griefs aloud,
We yield no pity, but in pride elate,
Turn, where the conqueror sits and sways in state.


With ruder pomp, in more barbaric taste,
His burial rites the Abyssinian graced;
Like the Egyptian, striving 'gainst the worm,
With costly balms preserved the mortal form;
But not with numerous swathings wrapt the dead,
His fancy counsell'd to unveil instead:
Most heedless, in his vanity, of shame,
Transparent amber clothed the naked frame;
Thus, to all eyes reveal'd, his farther rite,
Raised on high pillars, placed the corse in sight;
Thus, mocking Life with Death, and Time with Fate,
He left the loved one in his hideous state,
The sun still daily shining, but in vain,
On eyes that never smile on sun again!


In better taste, with tribute more refined,
The Etrurian chief his sepulchre design'd;
That wondrous race, of whom the little shown,
Reveals such promise in the vast unknown;
Kin to the Egyptian, father to the Greek—
If true the legend and conjecture speak—
In arts and arms that gloriously achieved,
And still survive the worship they believed;
That left to Rome their gods, without their faith,
And live in marble, though they sleep in death;
A night of twenty centuries, like a spell,
Oppressing Genius that achieved so well,
Denying History, curious still to pierce
The purple pall that hangs about her hearse,
And, hush'd on every theme that might have taught,
Still speaking vaguely, wondrously, to Thought!


How, as with pick and axe, exploring deep
In vaults that shelter well their ancient sleep,
We break through caves of marble that reveal
What pride hath wrought, and Time would still conceal—
How do we start, as on our vision rise,
Perfect as when their children closed their eyes,
Stately in helm and armor, robes and gold,
Their Lucumones as they sway'd of old!—
Princes and chiefs, whose deeds of answering fame
Thrill'd through their world, yet have for ours no name!
The weight of earth, for near three thousand years,
Press'd on the marble vault that hides their biers,
Preserving well from touch, and rude decay,
The haughty forms of manhood and of sway.


There he reclines,* as when he sought the strife,
Clad in bright armor, looking as in life,
The proud Lucumo!—They have scarcely gone,—
'Twould seem—who laid and seal'd him up in stone!
What awe pervades the soul, as thus we gaze
On this life-seeming state of ancient days!
No cunning effigy, the work of art,
Wrought in the marble, wanting sense and heart,
But the once powerful chieftain as he shone,
By nations honor'd, and to thousands known;—
Himself, at length, his limbs composed, his breast
Expanding, as with happiest slumbers bless'd.
Even as we gaze, life seems to stir beneath,
The bosom heaves as with returning breath;
We look to see him rise,—we pause to hear
His trumpet peal of battle from the bier!
But death is in the movement;—'tis the light
That heaves the frame, and stirs him to the sight;
Smote by the insidious air, the unwelcome day,
The crumbling corse sinks sudden to decay;
Time, mock'd so long, upon his subject darts,
The clay dissolves, the linkéd armor parts;—
The sceptre-grasping hand, the helméd brow,
And the mail'd breast that perfect seem'd but now,
Subside to dust, and mock the fond surprise,
That hail'd the vision late with awe-struck eyes.

* See the “Sepulchres of Etruria,” by Mrs. Hamilton Gray.

We glide below: with curious search we gaze
On these proud mansions of ancestral days;
Here wealth and care have vainly striven to prove
How proud their homage, and how fond their love;
What toils they used, what precious unguents brought,
With what sad skill the funeral garments wrought;
What sacrifice of gold and pomp was made,
For the great chief whose relics here they laid!
Art spared no service! On the walls behold,
How fresh the colors twenty centuries old;
How rich the painting—with what free design,
Warm in each tint, and bold in every line;
A wondrous story, which reveals a faith
That sees the soul escaped, surviving death;
Shows the group'd forms, in long procession led,
Surrounding fond, or following slow, the dead.—
There, stately still, the enfranchised ghost survey,
Led, by the rival Genii, into day—
The day that lets in judgment on the past,
Bright with great joys, or dread with clouds o'ercast.
There the good Angel, seeking still to save,
Receives and guides the freed one from the grave;
Beckons with smiling hope that soothes the fear,
And shows his “Esar”* merciful and near.
Not so the Evil Genii, who withstand
The gentle guidance of his guardian hand;
They bar the way to mercy, and, with thirst
Of eager malice, hoping still the worst,
Declare, of evil deeds, the dark account,
That should deny the ambitious soul to mount.
The painter leaves in doubt the fearful strife,
Whose issue broods with doom or glorious life,
But, of his aim and hope enough are shown,
To prove his promise not unlike our own,
Show that his faith still sought an upward goal,
And challenged wings for each immortal soul!

* Esar;—the Supreme Being of the ancient Etrurians.

The Greek! The Roman! At each mighty name,
How glow the great stars on the towers of Fame!
What triumphs crown'd their arms, their arts refined,
And lifted theirs o'er all the works of mind;
To gods raised mortals—for the mortal wrought
A refuge sure in deathless realms of thought—
From thought evoked philosophy, and wove
Bright laurels for the academy and grove!
That they should perish, should succumb, at length,
Spite of their ardent souls and matchless strength,
Perhaps was needful, lest, defying Fate,
They should forget how mortal was their state,—
Forget their subject destiny, and prove
Ungrateful rebels to the power of Jove!


Their arts, their subtle tastes, refined and proud,
Still mock'd the worm, and shudder'd at the shroud:
Still strove against corruption, and decreed
The fire their flesh, and not the grave, should feed.
Should earth, o'er which, in matchless might, they trod,
Lords of the world that trembled at their nod—
Should earth, the lowly, hide, as if in shame,
The imperial aspect and majestic frame?—
Should filial homage so forget the sire,
His pride, his fame, each deed and each desire,
Nor seek to cherish still, with ceaseless care,
The dust of one so precious, proud and fair?—
Preserve each vestige of the great, and shrine
In during gold the relics deem'd divine?


They dress the pyre with frankincense and spice,
Woods of rich perfume, and of rare device;
Slay the white oxen on the pile, and spread
With fat of sheep and lambs, the honor'd dead;
Gather the slaughter'd victims to the pile,
With flagons crown'd of honey and of oil;
Libations red, from golden bowls they pour,
Then from their brows the amber tresses shore;
These strew the dead. The corse upon the pyre,—
They light the scented torch, and feed the fire;
Watch through the night until it sinks from view,
Then, with ambrosial wines, the flames subdue.
This duty done, with reverent hands and care
They take the sacred ashes from the bier;
These, in a golden vase inurn'd, they hide,
By household love and worship deified;—
Nor kept in vain, since destined to receive,
In time, the ashes of the fond who grieve;
All, at the last, each honor'd one in turn,
May hope to mingle in the self-same urn,
In death unite the hearts, which, true in life,
Kept faith, unbroken still, by storm or strife!


These rites, barbarian still, with all their state,
Were but false tributes to the good and great.
Better our Christian rule, whose simple trust
Confides the dust, with tears, to kindred dust;
Holds in meet reverence still, the sacred clay,
The soul's fair mansion in its mortal day;
But builds its home from human homes apart,
Nor mocks corruption with the toys of art;
To the fresh earth, with meek and holy rite,
Conveys the shrouded clay from common light;
Midst sacred gloom of trees, midst shadows meet,
That mingle well the solemn with the sweet;
Where banks of thyme and daisy scent the ground,
While waters murmur nigh with slumberous sound;
Where the light hangs with mild autumnal ray,
And makes a sabbath of the livelong day;
As sacred here, by Etiwando's wave,*
As Mamre's plain, or old Machpelah's cave.

* Etiwando, the Indian name of Ashley River.

Even as we watch, with sad and wistful eye,
Where each gay phantom leaves the twilight sky,—
Through glooms material seeking still to trace
Each sweet expression, and beguiling grace;
From “cold obstruction” striving still to wrest
The features once so precious to the breast;
So, through the shadowy doubt of mortal gloom,
Through the grave's shroud, and through the marble tomb,
We trace the immortal spirit in its flight,
And hail its shining progress through the night;
Glow with new life, as on each rising wing,
We mark the colors of eternal spring,
And, for ourselves, find better strength to rise,
As thus we trace its passage through the skies!


Even as we muse, with homage that is prayer,
O'er each gray ruin once a temple fair,
And read the tale of empires through the shroud
That wraps the Genius once so strong and proud—
Grope through their vaults, explore with awe the rite
That makes their dead still sacred in our sight;—
The past grows subject to our present need,
And all the future blossoms as we read!—
If precious thus the nation's grave, unknown,
How, to our children, dearer still our own!
How fit the care that guards the holy place,
Crowns it with trees, and shapes its walks with grace;
Removes each noxious weed,—with tracts of green,
Soothes the sad eye, and solaces the scene;
Decrees, that hallowing peace shall still persuade
The living hearts that loved us, to its shade!


Here will they come, when wearied in the strife,
And gain, from walks of death, the strength for life;
Here fondly read each record that declares
To what bright virtues they become the heirs;
What patriot sires have done, to crown with fame,
The son's, the citizen's, the nation's name;
How Moultrie fought,—the scene beneath our glance,—*
In our first struggle for deliverance;—
Trace, with sweet tears of homage, mix'd with pain.
The mournful legend of the martyr'd Hayne;†
Turn, still obedient to the patriot spell,
To read how, rashly brave, young Laurens fell;‡
And, field and forum, equally in sight,
The shrine of Rutledge hail on loftiest height!
How, from the sea, returning to our shores,
Each kindred eye this sacred realm explores;
Reads at a glance, and reading still, reveres
Our State's proud record of two hundred years;
Sees, in each tomb, a tale of generous strife,
That crown'd our name with pride, our land with life;
And, from each shaft that rises o'er the steep,
Tells where the hero and the statesman sleep;
Cries, breathless, to his comrades, as he sees
There rest the Pinckneys, Gadsdens, Rutledges;§
Yon column honors Marion,§—and the spire,
White-shafted, 'neath the sun that glows like fire,
Our city rear'd in sadness, but in pride,
To one who, battling, in his harness died,
Late for his glory,—for our peace too soon,
The wondrous man of statesmen, our Calhoun!

* At Magnolia Cemetery, you look out and see Fort Moultrie, whence the British were beaten in the Revolution.
† Executed by the British in the war of the Revolution.
‡ John Laurens, the Bayard of the Revolution.
§ Well-known patriots of the Revolution.

Yet, not to these alone, the gifted, great,
Our sacred shrines and shades we consecrate;
Their tombs, the landmarks to the patriot eye,
With great historic names that cannot die,
Command the homage justly due to fame:—
But other loved and lost ones have their claim.
Not to our wonder, but our love, they plead,
With quiet virtues and unwritten deed;
This realm a city, where the humblest stand,
In place with those, the loftiest of the land;
Not great, but good; not raised to glory's height,
But dear to love, and precious in its sight;
By memory cherish'd when their toils are done,—
In hearts still warm, though hidden from the sun;
Bewept with tears, that soften as they fall,
And sought with prayers, though still beyond recall.
Their lowlier tombs in sacred groves shall rise,
Where Grief, unwatch'd, may watch with shrouded eyes!
Hither shall Love repair, in future hours
To dress and deck the cherish'd turf with flowers;
Here linger fond, while slowly sinks the day,
And fancy still a voice that pleads to stay.
Hither shall Reverence come,—the son, the friend,—
Mute with dear memories, and devoutly bend;
Here Contemplation veil her lofty brow,
Passion deplore, and meek Repentance bow;
Hope, from old ashes, light her torch anew,
And Duty learn what pathways to pursue.
The Sire, decreed to see his first-born fail,
Stricken, like the flower in wild autumnal gale,
Here, by the fractured column which he rears,
Find still a soothing virtue in his tears.
Hither, the Mother, widow'd in the hour
When Love was joyous most in bloom and flower,
Her orphan brood shall bring; and, by the sod
Where sleeps the Sire, describe the ways of God;
Train their young hearts to tenderness, and chide,
By sense of mortal loss, their mortal pride.


All, from the shrines of grief shall strengthen faith,
All gather lessons from the lips of death;
In fields of silence, find best gifts of speech;
Through worlds of darkness, worlds of brightness reach;
Grow strong with wrestling at the tomb with Thought,
And there win triumphs never won unsought!
Arm'd with the Cross, and glad beneath its weight,
There matchless Love shall conquer matchless Hate;
From sin the victim pluck, from wrath the doom,
From death the living—glory from the gloom!—
Grave, where thy victory now?—O Death, thy sting?—
Lo! the freed spirit on triumphant wing!
Joyous in conquest, hark! the white-robed train,
The Prince of Peace that welcome to his reign:
His trump of victory sounds—his legions rise,
Myriads of might, in congregated skies;
By Mercy led, they gather fast to save,
Time has no sway, no prison now the grave;
Glad eyes unclose, the bonds of Death are riven,
And white-wing'd Faith, with Love, ascends to Heaven!

[Back Cover Image]